Ada Lovelace Becomes the World's 
First Computer Programmer  
London -born Ada Lovelace (1815 –1852) had a passion and gift for 
mathematics from a young age. She is credited with being the  world's 
first computer programmer , as she drafted plans for how a machine 
called the Analytical Engine could perform computations. The 
machine, invented by her friend, mathema tician and inventor Charles 
Babbage, is considered to be the first general computer. Lovelace 
detailed applications for the Analytical Engine that relate to how 
computers are used today.  
Lovelace is remembered annually on  Ada Lovelace Day , held on the 
second Tuesday of October. The international day of recognition 
celebrates women in science, technology, engineering, and math 
(STEM).  
 
Grace Hopper Pioneers Computer 
Programming  
American Grace Hopper (1906 –1992) was an admiral in the United 
States Navy and a computer scientist who was one of the first 
programmers for the Harvard Mark I computer, which was a general 
purposes electromechanical computer used in the war effort for World 
War II, according to  San Diego Supercomputer Center . In 1944, she 
created a 500 -page Manual of Operations for the Automatic 
Sequence -Controlled Calculator for the computer, which detailed the 
foundational ope rating principles of computing machines.  
Hopper is also the inventor of the compiler, an intermediate program 
that translates English language instructions into the language of the 
target computer. This invention influenced other computing 
developments, li ke code optimization, subroutines, and formula 
translation.   
Hopper is remembered at the annual  Grace Hopper Celebration , the 
world's largest gathering of women technologists.  
 
Katherine Johnson Executes Critical 
Space Calculations  
Katherine Johnson, born in 1918, is one of the women immortalized in 
the 2016 book and movie  Hidden Figures.  A West Virginia native and 
American mathematician, Johnson helped confirm the accuracy of 
electronic computers used by  NASA  and performed critical 
calculations that ensured safe space travel from the 1950s on. She 
coauthored a research report that used equations for orbital 
spaceflight in 1960, performed trajectory analysis for the first human 
space flight in 1961, and ran equations on a desktop mechanical 
calculating machine before the 1962 orbital mission of John Glenn.  
Johnson worked on calculations for Project Apollo's Lunar Lander, the  
Space Shuttle, and the Earth Resources Satellite. In 2015, she 
received the Presidential Medal of Freedom.  
 
Margaret Hamilton Takes Humans to 
the Moon  
Margaret Hamilton, born in 1936, is an American computer scientist 
and systems engineer from Indiana who  led the Software Engineering 
Division of the MIT Instrumentation Laboratory. NASA credits her with 
coining the term “ software engineering .” Hamilton worked on 
software development for Apollo 11, the first spacecraft to complete a 
successful mission that placed humans on the moon in 1969. 
Hamilton's insistence on thorough testing is credited with the mission's 
success and  safety of its astronauts.  
The guidance software that Hamilton helped develop for Apollo was 
later adapted for use in Skylab, the space shuttle, and the first digital 
fly-by-wire systems in aircraft. Hamilton received the NASA 
Exceptional Space Act Award f or technical and scientific contributions 
in 2003 and the Presidential Medal of Freedom award in 2016.  
 
  