Republic of the Philippines 
Western Mindanao State  University 
College of Computing  Studies  
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Zamboanga City  
 
 
 
 
 
Web -Based House & Lot Price Prediction 
Using Gradient Boosting in Zamboanga City  
 
 
 
 
A Thesis presented to the faculty of 
Department of Computer Science 
College of Computing Studies  
 
 
In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of 
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science  
 
 
James Kheil S. Francisco 
Christle Joyce U. Santuyo 
Researchers  
 
 
 
 
Engr. Edwin I. Arip, MEnggEd - ICT 
Adviser  
 
 
 
 
April 8, 2022  

Western Mindanao State University  
College of Computing Studies  
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE  
Zamboanga City  
 
 
Approval Sheet  
 
 
The Thesis attached hereto, entitled “Web -Based House and Lot Price Prediction using 
Gradient Boosting in Zamboanga City” , prepared and submitted by James Kheil S. Francisco 
and Christle  Joyce  U. Santuyo,  in partial  fulfillment  of the requirements  for the degree  of Bachelor 
of Science in Computer Science, is hereby recommended for Oral  Examination . 
 
 
ENGR. EDWIN I. ARIP, MEnggEd -ICT 
Adviser  
 
 
APPROVED by the Oral Examination Committee on January 10, 2022  with a rating of PASSED . 
 
 
 
MS. LUCY F. SADIWA, MSCS  
Chairperson  
MR. JAYDEE C. BALLAHO  
Member  ENGR. MARJORIE A. ROJAS  
Member  
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Bachelor of Science in 
Computer Science  
 
 
ENGR. ODON A. MARAVILLAS JR, MSCS  
Head, Department of Computer Science  
 
 
 
RODERICK P. GO, Ph.D.  
Director, College of Computing Studies  
ii  Acknowledgement  
 
First and foremost, praises and thanks our Almighty God for His blessings and spiritual 
guidance throughout this study and for giving us the strength and knowledge to finish this thesis.  
 
 
This study  will not have been completed  and successful  without  the guidance  of our former 
adviser Engr. Marvic A. Lines for patiently guiding us on how to start our  thesis  study.  
To our thesis adviser Engr. Edwin I. Arip and with the help of Mr. Jaydee C. Ballaho , 
for the immense patience, effort, understanding, and vast knowledge they have given and shared 
with us. Thank you so much!  
 
 
To Mr. Arnel  V. Bayot  of the City Assessor’s  Office,  without  you we would  not have the 
data that we need for us to complete  our study.  Thank  you for your patience  and understanding,  sir. 
You will always have our  gratitude!  
 
 
And lastly,  to our beloved  family,  the Francisco  Family  and Santuyo  Family,  who served 
as our inspiration and strength. Thank you for your love, financial support, emotional support,  and 
understanding. Without you, we would not be able to finish our study. Thank you so  much!  
 
 
To the people who have been part of this research journey, classmates, teachers, friends, 
colleagues, and loved ones, thank you so much for the love and support!  
 
 
To God be the Highest Glory!  
iii  Abstract  
 
People are cautious when looking for a new home and regarding budgeting and market 
techniques. Machine -based forecasting technologies are not still known and utilized to estimate 
houses or other real estate properties in the Philippine Real Estate market. Thus, the researchers 
developed a web -based house and lot price prediction and embedded it with a machine -learning 
algorithm to forecast house and lot property prices in the Philippines, particularly in Zamboanga 
City.  This study  focuses  on developing  a system  that predicts  the calculated  cost of a house  and lot 
property. The information on the property listing was taken from historical assessed data of house 
and lot from the City Assessor's Office of Zamboanga City. The study uses three (3) different 
machine learning algorithms and chooses Grad ient Boosting Regression to predict the property's 
price. The Gradient Boosting Regression technique has a positive relationship between the 
dependent and independent variables. Compared to all other algorithms for predicting property 
prices, the gradient boosting approach has a high accuracy value. The measure can be improved 
even more  by applying  some  preprocessing  before  fitting  the data.  The goal of this study  is to help 
the seller sell a property at a reasonable price and help the buyer know the factor s that affect the 
selling price of the property. Some of the related factors that impact the cost were also  considered, 
such as location, physical conditions, and materials  used.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords: Machine Learning, Gradient Boosting, House Price Prediction  
v | P a g e   Table of Contents  
 
 
 
Approval Sheet  1 
Acknowledgement  ii 
Abstract  iii 
Table of Contents  v 
List of Figures  vi 
List of Tables  viii 
List of Appendices  ix 
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION  1 
Background of the Study  1 
Statement of the Problem  3 
Objectives  3 
Scope and Limitations  4 
Significance of the Study  4 
CHAPTER II REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE  7 
Related Studies  7 
Synthesis  12 
Comparison of the Related Systems  12 
Conceptual Framework  14 
CHAPTER III METHODOLOGY  15 
Research Design  15 
Respondents  15 
Data Gathering Instruments, Techniques, and Procedures  15 
Statistical Tools  16 
Analytical Tools  19 
Technical Tools  21 
System Architecture  25 
Implementation Plan  26 
CHAPTER IV RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  30 
Introduction  30 
Initial Data Analysis  30 
Initial Strategy, Regression  38 
Initial Strategy, Results  39 
vi | P a g e   Gradient Boosting Implementation and  Model Evaluation  41 
CHAPTER V CONCLUSION  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS  43 
Conclusion  43 
Recommendations  44 
References  45 
Appendix A  Gantt  Chart  48 
Appendix B  Evaluation Tool  49 
Appendix C  Photo Documentation  of Testing  51 
Appendix  D Algorithms  54 
Appendix E  Relevant  Source  Code  56 
Appendix F  Screenshot/Picture of  the System  61 
Appendix G  Test Cases  and Results  67 
Appendix H  Bug Report  69 
Appendix I  Survey  Questionnaire  70 
Appendix J  Curriculum  Vitae  72 
vi | P a g e   List of Figures  
 
Figure 1 Path used for preparing a model for prediction (Aalam &  Gaurav, 2018)          8 
Figure 2  Conceptual  Framework  14 
Figure 3  Systems  flowchart  19 
Figure 4 Entity -Relationship  Diagram  (ERD)  20 
Figure 5  Scrum  Methodology  23 
Figure 6  System  Architecture  25 
Figure 7  Network  Architecture  28 
Figure 8 Feature Statistics (Checking for null or  missing  values)  31 
Figure 9 Distribution  of Barangay  31 
Figure 10 Distribution  of Classification  32 
Figure 11 Distribution  for Doors  32 
Figure 12  Pearson Correlation  33 
Figure 13 Scatter Plot  (Floor  Area)  33 
Figure 14 Scatter Plot  (Land  Area)  34 
Figure 15 Feature Statistics (Checking for null or  missing  values)  34 
Figure 16 Scatter  Plot (Barangay)  35 
Figure 17 Scatter  Plot (Classification)  35 
Figure 18  Pearson  Correlation  36 
Figure 19 Scatter  Plot-Categorial  (Barangay)  36 
Figure 20 Scatter  Plot-Categorial  (Classification)  36 
Figure 21 Scatter Plot  (Land  Area)  37 
Figure 22 Means  and Median  38 
Figure 23 Residuals (Actual vs.  Predicted  prices)  40 
Figure 24 Gradient Boosting  Confusion  Matrix  41 
Figure 25  Gantt  Chart  48 
Figure 26 Data  samples  (Testing)  51 
Figure 27 Screenshot of  system  Testing  53 
Figure 28 Linear Regression Best Fit line – residuals in black  (Thomas,  2013)  54 
Figure 29  Ridge  Regression  54 
Figure 30 Decision Tree Regression  (Girgin.  2019)  55 
Figure 31 Landing Page of  the System  61 
vii | P a g e   Figure 32 Registration Page of  the System  62 
Figure 33 Login Page of  the System  63 
Figure 34 Market page of  the system  64 
Figure 35 Sell property (core of  the study)  64 
Figure 36 House  prediction form  65 
Figure 37 House  estimated  price  65 
Figure 38 Land  prediction  form  66 
Figure 39 Land  estimated  price  66 
viii | P a g e   List of Tables  
 
Table 1 Definition  of Terms  6 
Table 2 Comparison of the  Related  Systems  12 
Table 3  Software  Requirements  27 
Table 4  Model  Scores  39 
Table 5  Model  Parameters  40 
Table 6 Test  Cases  Report  68 
Table 7 Test  Result Summary  69 
ix | P a g e   List of Appendices  
 
Appendix A Gantt Chart 
Appendix B Evaluation Tool  
Appendix C Photo Documentation of Testing 
Appendix D  Algorithms  
Appendix E Relevant Source Code  
Appendix F Screenshot/Picture of the System 
Appendix G Test Cases and Results 
Appendix H Bug Report  
Appendix I Survey Questionnaire 
Appendix J Curriculum Vitae  
1 | P a g e   CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 
Background of the Study  
 
 
Machine learning is a branch of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that uses algorithms and 
technologies to extract valuable facts from large data. Machine learning approaches are suited for 
big data since manually processing massive amounts of data would be difficult without the 
assistance of machines. Machine learning tries to solve problems algorithmically or step by step 
rather than mathematically  in computer  science.  [1] The center  of developing  algorithms  is to allow 
the machine to learn. On the other hand, machine learning has two categories: supervised and 
unsupervised. It is a Supervised algorithm if datasets are trained  on a predetermined set of data to 
predict and present new data. The program tries to uncover the hidden pattern and relationship 
between the data when run unsupervised. Many regression methods rely on an unknown number 
of variables to produce the predicte d value. The performance is tested by forecasting house  prices. 
Specifications can determine the cost of a home. Houses have a variety of characteristics that may 
or may not have the exact  cost depending  on their location.  For example,  a large  house  in a desired 
wealthy neighborhood may command a higher price than one in a poor  community.  
 
A variety of factors determines the values of properties. In real estate, there is an 
explanation regarding a rise in the market by increasing the local population's income. As a result 
of the COVID -19 pandemic, the Philippine economy fell by 9.5 percent in 2020 compared to the 
previous year, the most significant drop since the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) began 
collecting statistics in 1946. From 2010 to 2019 , the economy increased at an annual rate of 6.4 
percent.  [8] However, rigorous study reveals that these characteristics, such as demand -oriented 
variables and others, can only momentarily suggest rising real estate prices. As a result, it can 
deduce that the variables are subject to change throughout time. The average household income 
determines house prices in the area, the availability of housing stock, and the payment mechanism 
(whether it accepts installment payments or requires cash payment).  
 
Real es tate corporations in Europe and other advanced countries are battling to build 
algorithms that can more precisely estimate real estate property prices. Researchers rely on well - 
2 | P a g e   known housing datasets, such as Boston and King City in the United States. The lack of a 
comprehensive housing dataset is one of the gaps in the Philippines, particularly in Zamboanga 
City. Some Philippine real estate property sites provide a good approximation of the housing 
market; however, they do not currently use house price predicting methods. Competitions on 
Kaggle  are organized  by websites  like Zillow,  a US real estate  marketplace,  to motivate  researchers 
to develop accurate house price forecasting algorithms. Because such issu es are uncommon in the 
Philippines, the only sources of housing data are those acquired in the Assessor's Office of a 
particular area in the Philippines, making it extremely difficult for researchers to develop such 
forecasting algorithms for the Philippin e real estate housing  data.  
 
Machine -based forecasting technologies are not yet used to estimate houses or other real 
estate properties in the Philippine real estate market. Thus, the researchers developed a house and 
lot price prediction with the applicat ion of a machine -learning algorithm to forecast the price of a 
house and lot property that includes a Land property price prediction because some other related 
study about price prediction is just prediction of a house property. The researchers add this  feature 
because the Philippines is also a hotspot for local and foreign property investors in building their 
businesses  as well as building  their own homes.  [16] Because  of the low property  rate of the country 
and great opportunities for investments, many foreign investors are willing to own a property  such 
as a house  and lot. The outcome  of the study  will be helpful  for the people  who want  to know  their 
property’s value and for interested buyers who want to know the value of their desired property. 
This wi ll also answer how the price anticipated by the system is close enough to the actual cost of 
the house and lot utilizing a machine learning  algorithm.  
3 | P a g e   Statement of the Problem  
 
The lack of a comprehensive housing dataset is one of the gaps in  the Philippines, 
particularly in Zamboanga City. Some Philippine Real Estate property sites approximate the 
housing market; however, they do not currently use house price -predicting methods. There is still 
an absence of machine -based forecasting technolog ies to estimate houses or other real estate 
properties in the Philippine real estate market.  
 
Thus, the initialization machine learning project predicts the house and lot property price 
with the application of machine learning algorithms such as Gradient B oosting. It will determine 
whether an independent variable positively affects the dependent variable.  
 
Objectives  
 
The general objective of the study is to predict the price of a house and lot property with 
the use of Gradient Boosting. Gradient boosting is a technique for building prediction models,  and 
it is used in improving cost functions by selecting weak hypotheses or a function with a negative 
gradient  iteratively.  
 
Specifically, the study will:  
● Gather datasets of sold properties needed for the pred iction model to  work.  
● Create a predicting model using Gradient Boosting with at least 80% predictive  accuracy.  
● Compare the predicted price on the actual selling price of a property to have fair standard 
pricing of a  property.  
● Give an idea to the buyers, investors, and sellers about the selling price of a house and lot 
property.  
● Prove that the use of Gradient boosting will have a positive relationship between the 
attributes of the property and the selling  price.  
4 | P a g e   Scope and Limitations  
 
Scope  
 
The scope of the study is to predict the estimated house and lot price depending on  factors 
such as the location of the property, lot area, floor area, and other related attributes that can 
contribute to the price of the house and lot in Zamboanga  City.  
 
The data used in the study would be the properties that have been assessed by the 
Assessor’s Office that contain different attributes specifically such as the house area, lot area, the 
location of the property, type of the house, other amenities and other r elated attributes that can 
contribute to the price of the house and lot.  
 
 
 
Limitations  
 
 
The study is limited in assessing the house properties that are located within the seven (7) 
kilometer radius and limited in evaluating the land properties within and  outside of the seven (7) 
kilometer radius of Zamboanga City. This study constrains the system’s capability of evaluating 
the materials used in building the house, appliances, and furniture of the house, if there is any. 
Value -Added Tax (VAT) is also exclu ded from the calculation.  
 
 
Significance of the Study  
 
 
The result of this study will be significant to the following:  
 
 
Buyers.  Through  this study,  they will have an idea of how much  is the value  of their desired  house 
and lot. This system  will give them  a planned  preparation  to save or prepare  the money  to purchase 
their desired  property.  
 
Investors. For them to know if the selling price of the house and lot is close enough to its actual 
price . This will give them an insight into the property’s attributes  that contributes to the price of 
the house and lot.  
5 | P a g e    
Sellers. They can sell the house and lot property at a fixed and calculated price. This system will 
help them to be credible. This study constraint can prove that the price is accurate or close enough 
to the real price.  
 
Real  Estate  Company.  For them  to have a tool that helps  them  calculate  the price  of the house  and 
lot in a fair market and improves their technical skills. The system will help them determine the 
selling price of the  property.  
 
Future Researchers. To guide, assist, and give them an idea of the possible improvements and 
developments they can include in this study.  
 
 
Definition of Terms  
 
 
Term  Definition  
1. Accuracy  – the measurement's proximity to a specified value.  
2. Datasets  – a collection of standardized data to be used in the system.  
 
3. Gradient Boosting  – a machine learning technique used in regression and 
classification tasks, among others. It gives a prediction model in 
the form of an ensemble of weak prediction models, which are  
typically decision trees.  
4. House & Lot  – a type of property than can be sold individually or in a package  
deal.  
5. Machine Learning  – allows an algorithm to learn from the data and to improve its  
experience with less human interaction.  
6. Prediction  – the act of estimating something (result or value) that will happen  
in the future or will be the result of the present.  
7. Price  – the amount of money that is desired, demanded or offered in  
exchange for something, the value of a certain thing.  
8. Property  – the possession or possessions of a particular owner or individual.  
6 | P a g e   9. Testing data  – a set of data that is used to evaluate the model or system’s  
accuracy.  
10. Training data  – a set of data that is used to  train a machine learning application  
to identify patterns and perform the specification.  
 
11. Data cleaning  – is the process of detecting and correcting (or removing) corrupt  
or inaccurate records from a record set, table, or database and 
refers to identifying incomplete.  
12. Data processing  – is simply converting raw data to meaningful information through  
a process.  
13. Linear regression  – attempts to model the relationship between two variables by  
fitting a linear equation to observed data.  
 
14. Ridge regression  – is a method of estimating the coefficients of multiple -regression  
models in scenarios where linearly independent variables are 
highly correlated. (Great Learning Blog)  
15. Appraisal  – a valuation of the property by the estimate of an authorized  
person (Merriam -Webster)  
Table 1 Definition of Terms  
7 | P a g e   CHAPTER II  
REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE  
 
 
Related Studies  
 
In the study of Kumar et al. [4], numerous studies have proved the impact of a property's 
location and surrounding neighborhood in determining its price. However, some neighborhood 
characteristics may be unobservable, and the optimum way to acquire location data remains an 
unanswered subject for the price forecasting model. The goal of their study is to predict the 
predicted price of a house property using a gradient boost regressor. The initial stage is to gather 
raw data from multiple sources, and the dataset might be any historical data. The attributes are the 
number of stories, th e number of bedrooms, the number of bathrooms, the availability of a  garage, 
a swimming pool, a fireplace, the year the house was built, the square footage, and the sale price. 
The researchers used these features to train the machine on Gradient boost regr ession and forecast 
the house  price.  They  also calculated  the accuracy  by comparing  the test set predictions  to the actual 
values. The suggested system calculates the anticipated price. They used a decision tree classifier, 
by which 70% of the data were used for training, and 30% was used for testing the data. The 
decision  tree algorithm  generates  the categorization  rules.  The data can be tested  using  the training 
data. Using this model made it possible to get output or an accurate predicted stock  price.  
 
Revend [13] describes how they preprocessed the data and the steps they made before 
training  the model.  Their  study  focuses  on predicting  the price  of a house  located  in the countryside 
of Sweden using boosted decision trees. They first find the geographical coordinates, latitude, and 
longitude to improve the positional accuracy of the areas in Sweden. Then they sort out the 
residences that do not belong to the countryside. They only selected the villas type of residence , 
and they filtered out the other type of residence. Then they use the KT filter to exclude the 
residences  that are under  or overvalued.  Since  their data was sold properties,  so they need to adjust 
the residence price. They also treat the missing data by r emoving the redundant data and  replacing 
some  variables  with a large  percentage  of missing  values  with -1, and replacing  some  not a number 
(nan) deals with the mean. They used the method of feature scaling to normalize the variables. A 
scaling algorithm, RobustScaler is used to robust the outliers. They also used 70% of their data  set 
for training  data,  and 30% was used for testing  data.  They  did hyper -parameter  to know  the number 
of iterations, step size of the gradient boosting algorithm, and the maximum  tree depth.  
8 | P a g e    
 
 
Aalam & Gaurav [7] uses a path that they used for preparing the model for house price 
prediction purpose.  
 
Path used for preparing a model for prediction (Aalam &  Gaurav, 2018)  
 
The above  diagram  shows  the steps  or way of preparing  a model  for predicting  house  price. 
The first step is the preprocessing of data. It plays a vital role because the data needs to be 
investigated and preprocessed first before usage to remove some redundancy in data if any, and 
null values. After preprocessing the data, it will now be the separation of the training data and the 
testing. The preliminary data collection used by computers to learn how to apply methods such as 
linear regression to generate correct outcomes is known as training data. On  the contrary, testing 
data are used if the building model is complete. Testing data will determine how the built model 
performs when a new set of data is inputted. After separating the sets of data to be used, it is now 
time to prepare the model with the Regression approach to the training data. Here, they used 
multiple regression because they used several  features.  
 
In the study of Ho et al. [9] they used different machine learning algorithms to know  what 
best performs in predicting prices, and each algor ithm has other techniques. They employed a 
regression  method  called  Support  Vector  Machine  (SVM)  to split objects  into distinct  groups  while 
maximizing the distance between data points. Support Vector Regression (SVR), a regression 
approach developed by SVM, is used to train the model using a supervised learning method. The 
outcome  of their dataset  has been divided  into five (5) folds  as a result  of their SVM  estimation,  

9 | P a g e   and these folds are the subsets that will be used in the iteration for training and testing the dataset. 
In other words, the resampling procedure or cross -validation is designed for evaluating machine 
learning models. Gradient Boosting was utilized to turn a weak feature into a strong learner. 
Gradient Boosting uses the error  rate to compute the gradient of the error function, then uses the 
gradient to figure out how to tweak the model parameters to lower the error with each iteration. 
According  to their study,  advanced  machine  learning  algorithms  such as SVM,  RF, and GBM  have  
been demonstrated  to be potential  tools  for property  researchers  to utilize  in house  price  predictions. 
The use of machine learning in property research provides methodological and empirical 
contributions to property evaluation, as well as giving an alter native approach to the valuation of 
housing  values.  
 
In a study conducted by Uzut [17], the goal of a study was to forecast the price of a real 
estate property. It examined multiple techniques (linear regression, random forest regressor, and 
gradient boosting) and discovered that gradient boosting outperformed the others. This model is 
used to make predictions. Based on the holdout method, three distinct sizes of testing sets were 
chosen from the dataset: 10%, 20%, and 30%. Then, taking these sizes int o account, prediction 
models were created, and accuracy (highest) and error rates were determined. They utilized 80% 
of their dataset for the training set and the remaining 20% for the testing set. According to their 
results,  the gradient  boosting  method  delivered  the best performance  for real estate  price  prediction. 
A new dataset with extra parameters can be used to expand this  research.  
 
Monika et al. [12] conducted research on House Price Forecasting using Machine 
Learning methods that focus on the idea  of predicting the price of a house property. They utilized 
machine learning algorithms and discovered a reasonable forestalling price with a low fault rate. 
They used various machine learning algorithms such as Extreme Gradient Boosting, Gradient 
Boosting , Light Gradient Boosting, Support Vector Machine, and Random Forest Regression, and 
these  algorithms  were  compared  according  to their performance  in predicting  prices.  The evaluation 
of the algorithms used was done by calculating the error value. The grea ter the error value, the 
higher the accuracy rate of the regression model. The performance was measured using the Mean 
Square Error (MSE) and the Root Mean Square Error  (RMSE).  
 
Imran et al. [10] conducted a research study about House Price prediction usin g various 
machine learning algorithms to determine which algorithms performed better in predicting prices. 
They  used Gradient  Boosting,  Linear  Regression,  Bayesian  Regression,  Support  Vector  Regressor,  
10 | P a g e   Stochastic Gradient descent, ElasticNet Regression, Passive Aggressive Regression and  Theil -Sen 
Regression. To evaluate the performance matrices of each algorithm, they used Mean Absolute 
Percentage Error (MAPE), Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), and Mean Absolute Error (MAE). 
The outcome of their  study resulted in being successful and shows that the Support Vector 
Regression performs best than the other algorithms they used. Their study shows which of the 
algorithms they had used has a better performance in predicting  prices.  
 
Abdulal  and Aghi  [1] propose  a study  that focuses  on the performance  comparison  between 
machine  learning  regression  and Artificial  Neural  Network  (ANN).  Multiple  linear,  Least  Absolute 
Selection Operator (Lasso), Ridge, and Random Forest are the regression techniques employed  in 
this work. Furthermore, this research seeks to find the most relevant elements that influence 
property prices in Malmö, Sweden, by analyzing the correlation between variables. In this 
investigation, two datasets labeled public and local were employed. They show home values in 
Ames, Iowa, and Malmö, Sweden, respectively. The training model's root square and root mean 
square error scores are used to assess the prediction's accuracy. After applying the necessary pre - 
processing methods and separating the d ata into two halves, the test is carried out. However, one 
component  will be used during  training,  and the other  will be used for testing.  They  also introduced 
a binning approach that increased the model's  accuracy.  
 
Kokasih and Paramita [11] created software that can predict the price for property rental. 
Listing feature, neighborhood, review, date, and property owner information are the variables  they 
considered in their study. The user's dataset is used to generate a prediction model, which is then 
processed  using  the Extreme  Gradient  Boosting  algorithm  and saved  in the system.  The findings  of 
their study are likely to be used to develop property rent price prediction models for property 
owners and tourists to consider when renting a property. The re sult of their study shows that the 
Extreme Gradient Boosting algorithm can estimate property rental prices with an average RMSE 
of 10.86 percent (or 13.30  percent).  
 
Singh and J [15] developed a research study of price prediction for a Land property with 
the use of a Machine Learning Algorithm. In their study, they constructed a machine learning 
application that considers numerous elements in the real estate market in real -time, such as  houses 
that are advertised  at a lower  price  than the market  price,  as well as demographics  and other  factors. 
They combined two alternative machine learning architectures based on Random Forest (RF) and 
Linear  Regression  to predict  property  prices  (LR).  As they combined  these  two machine  learning  
11 | P a g e   algorithms,  the result  shows  that the enriched  Random  Forest  performs  well with numeric  features. 
Since they predict the prices from online advertisements, it requires the insight of data combined 
with powerful machine learning  algorithms.  
 
A research study made by Sahithi et al. [14] Crop Price Prediction System using Machine 
learning  Algorithms  focuses  on identifying  appropriate  data models  that aid in achieving  high price 
forecast accuracy and generality. On various data sets, various data mining approaches were 
assessed. It describes a system that employs data analytics approaches to forecast crop prices. The 
suggested system will use machine learning algorithms to forecast crop prices based on several 
criteria such as harvested area, planted area, and so on. This  gives a farmer an idea of what the 
future price of the crop he'll be harvesting will be. The study creates a system by combining data 
from a variety of sources. Data analytics and prediction analysis can assist farmers in predicting 
the crop's target pric e and boost their profit margins in the long run. After conducting extensive 
research, they have determined that XGBoost is the best -fit machine learning for their  project.  
12 | P a g e   Synthesis  
 
 
Comparison of the Related Systems  
 
Existing 
System  Graphical 
Presentation  Price 
Prediction  Web - 
Based  Land 
Property  Machine 
Learning  
House Price 
Calculator – 
Nationwide   
🗶  
✔  
✔  
🗶  
🗶 
Acadata  ✔ ✔ ✔ 🗶 ✔ 
Property  
Solvers  🗶 ✔ ✔ 🗶 🗶 
Springbok 
Properties  🗶 ✔ ✔ 🗶 🗶 
Web-based 
House and Lot 
Price 
Prediction 
using 
Gradient 
Boosting 
Regression   
 
 
✔  
 
 
✔  
 
 
✔  
 
 
✔  
 
 
✔ 
Table 2 Comparison of the Related Systems  
 
 
 
The table shows the different related existing systems that have price prediction.  
 
Property Solvers let the user input the postcode of a certain address, and the system will find the 
location and display all listings properties within that area.  
House Price Calculator and Acadata have a feature house price calculator where users can 
calculate  their property’s  current  value.  Users  must  fill in the fields  such as property  type,  purchase 
price, purchase year, and postcode for them to get the current value of their  property.  
Springbok Properties is offering a fast transaction of selling a property. Users can search the 
location of the property they want by filtering in depending on their minimum or maximum price 
of the property, type of the property, and minimum or the maximum number of bedrooms. This 
gives the user an idea of what location has the property they are planning to buy.  
 
Most of the  predicting systems do not have a prediction for Land properties. The 
researchers opted to include other functionalities in the system to be suitable in Philippine settings.  
13 | P a g e   The reason why the researchersinclude Land Property is that in the P hilippines, it is common to 
have an empty land property for the people who wants to have an investment. They will acquire a 
property, and if they will not use or build something on it, they will sell it. Some people just want 
to know the estimated price of  their property. This system will be a tool for them to calculate the 
price of their property without going outside of their hous  
14 | P a g e   Conceptual Framework  
 
 
Figure 2 Conceptual Framework  
 
 
The above diagram shows the steps or path in preparing a  model for predicting house 
prices. The first step is the preprocessing of data. It plays a vital role because the data needs to be 
investigated and preprocessed first before usage to remove some redundancy in data if any, and 
null values. After preprocess ing the data, it will now be the separation of the training data and the 
testing. The preliminary data collection used by computers to learn how to apply methods such as 
gradient  boosting  to generate  correct  outcomes  is known  as training  data.  Then,  the testing  data are 
used if the building model is complete. Testing data will determine how the built model performs 
when a new set of data is inputted. After separating the sets of data to be used, it is now time to 
prepare the model with the Regression approach on the training data. The researchers used linear 
regression in predicting the final value of the house and lot based on the inputted  features.  

15 | Page   CHAPTER III 
METHODOLOGY  
 
Research Design  
 
 
The purpose of this study is to apply Gradient  Boosting in predicting the price of a house 
and lot property.  
 
This study used an experimental research design to solve a specific problem and provide 
relatively new solutions to the issues or concerns, or factors that affect society. Empirical research 
best fits this study. It could be helpful because it includes a scientific approach and uses statistical 
tools to analyze data. The researchers used this kind of research design to attempt to predict the 
price of a house and lot property with a machine lear ning algorithm.  
 
Respondents  
 
The target users of this study are the following: The Buyers will provide them with a 
strategy for saving or preparing funds to purchase their desired property. The Investors will help 
them know if the selling price of the hou se and lot is close enough to the actual worth. The  Sellers 
can sell the house and lot property at a fixed and calculated price. The Real Estate Companies  will 
have a tool that helps them calculate the cost of the house and lot in a fair market and improve s 
their technical skills. Future researchers will make this study a guide, assistance, and giver of the 
idea of the possible improvements a house and lot can  make.  
 
 
Data Gathering Instruments, Techniques, and Procedures  
 
This section describes how data is  gathered, processed, trained, and tested. The data are 
historical properties assessed and collected at the Assessor's Office of Zamboanga City. The 
researchers  prepared  a request  letter  to gather  the said data on the said office.  Due to the pandemic, 
transactions  and offices  in Zamboanga  City,  including  the Assessor's  Office,  had closed;  therefore, 
there is a limitation in needed  data.  
16 | Page   Location, total floor area, and lot area are mostly to consider in predic ting the property's 
price. These would be the independent variables, and the expected price would be the dependent 
variable. The data collected are from the historical assessed property records. Researchers 
standardized the data by turning categorical valu es into numerical values so that the language 
recognizes them and has equal and no null and redundancy within the data; data are clean and  pre- 
processed. Once done, the data are categorized into two (2) training and test data. Training data is 
training da ta set with the machine learning  algorithm.  
In contrast,  in Testing  data,  a data set will verify  if the machine  learning  has already  learned 
from the fed or trained data. The machine learning algorithm used in training will be gradient 
boosting,  appropriate  for predicting  continuous  values,  and used to indicate  the house  and lot price. 
Before applying linear regression, determine whether there is a relationship between the  variables. 
To determine  that, a scatter  plot will be helpful.  It is a graphical  tool for visualizing  the relationship 
between variables. The machine learning model evaluates and analyzes the data after separating 
the data processing to predict the house and lot  price.  
 
Statistical Tools 
Regression Analysis  
In the Statistical  model, regression analysis collects statistical procedures for 
calculating the relationships among variables. It includes some techniques for modeling 
and examining  various  variables  when  emphasizing  the relationship  between  the dependent 
variable  and more individual  variables  or predictors.  More  specifically,  regression  analysis 
helps this study see how the standard measure of this dependent variable (or criterion 
quantity) shifts when any of these individual variables are different. In contrast, it does  fix 
other independent  variables.  
 
Median  
 
 
In the collected raw data, there is an empty value for the feature land area, floor area, and 
price; this can contribute to an error in developing the model for houses and lot. The statistical 
median is the middle  value or number in a given sequence of numbers. For the data cleaning, the 
researchers  have used the statistical  median  to fill up the empty  values  for the land area,  floor  area,  
17 | Page   and the market price. These features are the type of double or  floating values, and the researchers 
did not include other features that should fill with a whole number. It may cause an error for the 
data because a median could result in decimal numbers and should not be for the other features.  
 
Mode  
 
 
Categorical dat a may have an empty value after converting the collected raw data. The 
non-numerical data incorporates categorical data such as barangay, ceiling, flooring, roofing, roof 
framing, and other data features. The researchers used mode statistics to fill in the  blanks to find 
the most  frequently  observed  value  in a data set. It must  be related  to the statistical  median  used for 
the whole number. The researchers did not use the median for categorical data because there is a 
tendency to get a decimal result, which  is inappropriate for categorical  data 
 
Pearson Correlation Coefficient  
 
 
The researchers used the Pearson correlation coefficient as a test statistic for 
evaluation in this study. The statistical relationship, or association, between two 
continuous variab les known as the best method for quantifying the relationship between 
variables of interest because they relate it to covariance. It provides information on the 
magnitude and direction of the relationship's link or correlation.  
 
Scatter Plot  
 
 
Before applying linear regression, determine whether there is a relationship 
between the variables. To determine that, a scatter plot will be helpful. It is a graphical 
tool for visualizing the relationship between variables.  
 
R-Squared (R²)  
 
 
The researchers use d R² metrics to identify if the data fit or was close to its 
accuracy. A higher r -squared indicates a better fit for the model. The r -squared value of  
0.3 and less than 0.5 is generally considered a weak or low effect size and weak  accuracy  
18 | Page   score s. If the r -squared value of 0.5 and less than 0.7, the value is regarded as a moderate 
effect, and if the r -squared value is more significant than 0.8,  
it is considered a substantial effect size.  
19 | Page   Analytical Tools  
 
Figure 3 Systems flowchart  

20 | Page   For this flowchart, there will be a discussion of the following stages.  
 
1. Start  
2. Users must first create an  account.  
3. To log in, users must give an email address and a  password.  
4. It will check if the email and password exist or have gone under v alidation after 
entering all of the required information for  login.  
5. The system will display the market page or dashboard if an email and  password 
are legitimate.  
6. Select the property where users want to estimate/predict by clicking Sell  property.  
7. Fill in th e required information for each feature shown on the evaluation  form, 
then click  "Continue."  
8. It will show the market property value after it processes the data  model.  
9. It will take you to the posting page. You will get another form to fill out to list 
your property information and the system's estimated  price.  
10. Once you click the "Post" button, It will now be visible to your property market 
after you click the "Post"  button.  
11. End 
 
 
Figure 4 Entity -Relationship Diagram (ERD)  

21 | Page   The system allows the  users to fill up a data form that will serve as their account 
information. It contains the first name, last name, email address, contact number, password, and 
image and its name and mime type for the User class.  
 
The system  allows  the user to fill out the posting  form,  which  contains  the following:  title, 
content, date posted, the requisite three photos, and the estimated price, after completing the 
relevant data for the house and lot  forms.  
 
The system collects minor device data for the Login History clas s, such as the type of 
operating system used by the user device and the Date Time when the user logged in.  
The system displayed the class of interest as a wish list, allowing users, buyers, and even 
sellers to add their interest properties to the wish list . The goal is to add interest without an 
immediate intent to buy.  
 
In the Entity -Relationship Diagram (ERD) process, the user class can have zero or more 
Posts, and Posts can have one -to-one relationships with the user class. The same logic for the type 
of interest. A user can have zero or more interests, and the User to Login History class, where a 
user can have zero or more login records.  
 
Technical Tools  
 
Technical Tools  
 
 
This section discusses the different tools or components used to develop and complete the system 
that contains technical terms and the packages. The following are the technical components used 
in developing the system.  
 
Integrated Development Environment (IDE)  
● Visual Studio Code is a multilingual programming IDE that supports a var iety of plugins, 
packages, and languages such as HTML, CSS, and JavaScript suited for the  developer.  
Data Management  
● Orange is an open -source data visualization and analysis  tool. 
● Microsoft Excel is a spreadsheet used for calculation, computation, and graphing  tools. 
Front -End Frameworks  
22 | Page   ● Bootstrap  is an open -source  front -end development  framework  for creating  websites  and web 
apps.  It is built on HTML,  CSS,  and JavaScript  to facilitate  the development  of responsive,  mobile - 
first sites and  apps.  
Backend Frameworks  
● Jinja is a fast, expressive, extensible templating engine. It allows writing code like Python 
syntax, and the template will pass data to render the final  document.  
● Flask is a lightweight WSGI web application framework designed to make getting started 
quick and easy, with the ability to scale up to complex applications. It has become one of the  most 
popular Python web application  frameworks.  
● JavaScript  is high-level,  often  just-in-time compiled,  and multiparadigm.  It has curly -bracket 
syntax, dynamic typing, prototype -based object orientation, and first -class  functions.  
● Jupyter is a fast, small, and feature -rich JavaScript library. It makes things like HTML 
document traversal and manipulation, event handling, animation, an d Ajax much simpler with an 
easy-to-use API that works across a multitude of  browsers.  
● NodeJS  is an open -source,  cross -platform,  backend  JavaScript  runtime  environment  that runs 
on the V8 engine and executes JavaScript code outside a web  browser.  
● Jupyter N otebook is an open -source web application that allows us to share documents, 
equations,  and visualizations.  The use of jupyter  also includes  data cleaning  and transformation  and 
statistical modeling, which the system  used.  
● Python is an object -oriented, high-level programming language used in coding and  designing 
the system's  backend.  
 
Software Process Model  

23 | Page   Figure 5 Scrum Methodology  
 
 
The software development methodology used in this study is the Scrum methodology. 
Scrum is the iterative and progressive model for managing development. In this system, many 
essential requirements need to do again to achieve the system's goal. For the process model, the 
researchers must get all the vital requirements first and then start working on the requir ements 
gathered.  In Scrum  Methodology,  usually,  it goes with Sprint.  In Sprint,  this project  might  take one 
year to finish, and it takes time for the client to wait for the entire year to deliver the product. The 
client  will not wait long for the researchers  to deliver  the product  so Sprint  will do the process  every 
2-4 weeks. The client is updated on the product progress so that the sprints will give an initial or 
potentially shippable product increment. For this visualization, the flows are expla ined below.  
 
A small rectangle or box represents an essential requirement in the product backlog. It  has 
to break it down for the current Sprint or the current week and its sub -parts. It can define later or 
every 2 -4 weeks depending on the due of the  requi rements.  
 
The sprint backlog is the process that can call the current sprint backlog, but before that, 
the researchers must plan the Sprint (Sprint planning) of what will take and what the requirements 
have.  The group  got a product  backlog,  then a plan (sprint planning),  and then got a sprint  backlog. 
Once  the group  has the sprint  backlog  after 2-4 weeks  of working  on the system,  the next is to build 
the product. The responsibility for it is the scrum team. The team consists of only two members to 
do this  system.  
 
For the Daily Scrum, the group makes some meetings on the google meet to discuss what 
to do next for the product.  The Sprint  Review  showed  the feeds  about  the progress  and the updates 
of the product for the first increment. The group deployed more  updates about the product in the 
first two weeks,  the first increment.  But, in the first Sprint,  the group  did not complete  all the sprint 
backlog, so they sent the remaining backlog in the next  Sprint.  
 
In the previous Sprint, the group will now complete  the last Sprint and take some extra 
knowledge from the product backlog. Still, before going back to the sprint backlog, the group has 
to do the Sprint Retrospective. The sprint backlog that the researcher has learned will be used in 
the Sprint Retrospecti ve [1]. 
24 | Page   In conclusion, Scrum emphasizes teamwork in project management. It stresses 
accountability  and is iterative  progress  towards  a well-defined  goal.  Scrum  is part of agile  software 
development, and teams practice agile. The name comes from rugby, where Scrum is a formation 
where everyone plays a specific role. However, everyone is working towards a quick adoption of 
strategies.  
25 | Page   System Architecture  
 
 
Figure 6 System Architecture  
 
 
Presentation Tier  
 
 
The system architecture used in this study is a 4 -tier system architecture since the system 
is a web application  or web-based.  The buyer,  investors,  and real estate  company  will be the client, 
and they will be able to manipulate the data, such as the barangay, land a rea (sq/m), floor area 
(sq/m), classification, storey, roof framing, roofing, exterior walls, flooring, doors, ceiling, 
windows, wall finish, electrical conduit, toilet, plumbing, that’s all for the house. For the Land, 
there are only three features, the b arangay, land area (sq/m), and classification, whether it is 
commercial or  residential.  
 
 
 
Web Tier  
 
 
In this system  architecture,  the web tier allows  the webserver  to communicate  between  the 
users' web browsers to the logic  tier. 
 
 
 
Logic Tier  
 
 
The web application handles the commands and the logic of the data decision, the data 
analysis  and evaluation  of the data from  the fields  from  the presentation  tier to the machine  learning 
model, and the data  management.  

26 | Page   Data Tier  
 
 
In the data tier, all data provided  by users  in the presentation  tier will be collected  and kept; 
it stores all necessary data to be used in the system. Users' data are collected, including their first 
and last names,  email  addresses,  phone  numbers,  profile  images,  and passwords,  as well as the sort 
of operating  system  they used to log in. The title, content  of the property,  price  of the property,  date 
of posting, and three photos of the property are all included in the data for posting the  property.  
 
 
Implementation Plan  
 
This section  will discuss  the implementation  plan of the system  for the client  or target  users. 
The target users are buyers, sellers, real estate agents, and future researchers. To gain an 
understanding  of implementation  strategy  first is to determine  the strategic  idea.  A strategic  idea is 
a process of determining the strategy by which the researchers achieve a specific goal and made 
decisions. The organizations create strategic plans to take the organizational position, one specific 
sector’s campaign, or any program or  enterprise.  
 
For the client to know the system, it will be advertised in a commercial advertisement. 
Commercial ads often seek to generate increased consumption of the developed system or the 
services through branding, which associates the s ystem's name and logo with certain qualities in 
the minds of consumers. On the other hand, ads that intend to elicit an immediate sale are known 
as direct response advertising.  
 
Include software, hardware, network, and database requirements  
 
● Hardware  Requi rements  
 
The following are the system requirements that are needed by the client. They are 
required to have internet connectivity to access it in the browser. The following are the 
standard minimum browser requirements:  
 
o CPU: Pentium 4 and  above  
o Memory: 51 2 MB 
o Storage: 150  MB 
27 | Page    
The system requirements used for development:  
o CPU: Intel(R) Core or  Newer  
o Memory:  8GB 
o Storage:  136GB  
 
● Software  Requirements  
 
 Desktop  Mobile  
Operating  
System  Windows 7 and above, Mac OS X 
10.2 Android 5 and above, iOS or later  
Browser  Chrome, Firefox, Microsoft Edge, 
Opera mini, Brave, UC  
 
Min. Disk Space: 150 MB 
Rec. Disk Space: 70 MB  
Rec. Disk Space 64 -bit: 120 MB  Chrome,  Safari,  Opera  mini, 
Firefox, UC,  Brave  
Table 3 Software Requirements  
 
 
The packages used for the development and deployment of the system by the command of pipreqs  
includes the following:  
- Flask==2.0.1  
- Flask_Login==0.5.0  
- Flask_SQLAlchemy==2.5.1  
- numpy==1.21.3  
- pytz==2021.3  
- SQLAlchemy==1.4.23  
- Werkzeug==2.0.1  
 
 
 
The system software requirements used for development:  
 
 
● Network Requirements  
 
 
 
Internet Connection  
28 | Page   A stable, and high -speed internet connection is required for accessing the 
web-application.  The response  time for each assessment  depends  on the reliability 
and speed of the  network.  
 
 
 
Bandwidth  
Network Min. Bandwidth: 500 kbps 
The part of the Network architecture:  
o Client  
o Internet  
o Router  
o Web Server  
o Internet Service Provider  (ISP)  
o Domain Name System  (DNS)  
 
 
Figure 7 Network Architecture  
 
 
● Database  Requirements  
 
A relational database was used for this project. The relational database management 
system (RDMS) is a program that allows users to create, update, and administer a relational 
database. It also allows users to store numerous data, related ta bles, and data in rows and 
columns inside the tables. The researchersneed to design a database schema for the House  and 
Lot price prediction system based on the  following.  

29 | Page   o USERS The system allows the users to fill up a data form that will s erve as their account 
information, which contains the first name, last name, email address, contact number, 
password, and image and its name and mime type for the User class.  
o POST The system allows the user to fill out the posting form, which contains the following: 
title, content, date posted, the requisite three photos, and the estimated price, after completing 
the relevant data for the house and lot  forms.  
o LOGIN HISTORY The system collects minor device data for the Login History class, such 
as the type of operating  system  used by the user device  and the DateTime,  when  the user logged 
in. 28 The system  displayed  the class  of Interest  as a wish list, allowing  users,  buyers,  and even 
sellers to add their interest properties to the wish  list. 
o The goal is to add interest without an immediate intent to buy. In the Entity -Relationship 
Diagram (ERD) process, the class of User can have zero or more Posts, and Posts can have 
one-to-one relationships with the class of User. The same logic for the class of Interest, where 
a user can have zero or more  interests,  and the class  of User to Login  History,  where  a user can 
have zero or more login  records.  
o Database type: Relational Database, SQL  Server  
30 | Page   CHAPTER IV 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
 
Introduction  
 
This chapter presents the results and discussion gathered from the collected data, data 
analysis, and the results of the three -machine learning algorithm, the linear regression, ridge, and 
the gradient boosting algorithm, it will also present the process of cle aning the data, the formula 
used when  there  is a null, empty  fields,  the data processing  after cleaning,  evaluation  of the model, 
and the confusion  matrix.  
 
Initial Data Analysis  
 
The researchers promptly encode the hard copy of the request data to excel after receiving 
it from the City Assessor’s Office. Due to the pandemic, transactions and offices, including the 
Assessor's Office in Zamboanga City, were closed and has a limited employee to process the 
request and resulting to have a limited dataset  acquired. 
 
The real -property field appraisal sheet for Building or House contains 145 instances and 
18 features, while the real -property field evaluation sheet for Land contains 158 instances and 3 
features. The researchers found 106 samples that were suitable  for the house and 114 samples that 
were suitable for the land. Using Slovin's formula, the study calculated the appropriate amount 
depending on the desired confidence level of 95%. After calculating, the analysis requires 106 
samples  for the home  and 114 samples  for the land using  Slovin's  formula.  All eighteen  (18) feature 
of the house is related to the house price impact, whereas three (3) features of the land are related 
to the land price  impact.  
 
After receiving the housing dataset, it was discovered that there is a possibility that the 
limited  number  of datasets  that the researchers  have can affect  the gap in the predicted  price.  It was 
considered as errors in the datasets such as abbreviation or shortcut value of each feature that 
resulted to some confusion in analysis and missing values in each feature. The following are the 
statistics of the house dataset to see the missing values in each  feature.  
31 | Page   Real -Estate Property Field Appraisal Sheet – Building | House  
 
 
Figure 8 Feature Stati stics (Checking for null or missing values)  
 
 
The first step in the data analysis is to see if there are any missing values if the data 
distribution is unbalanced. Finding the median of each feature is the way to replace the missing 
values. This is where t o get the missing values from the dataset. As shown in Fig. 11 Barangay 
Distribution, the means are calculated, and the distribution of graphs is displayed. It was decided 
to drop these features to avoid low accuracy in our prediction because the Structura l type has the 
most missing values in the dataset.  
 
 
Figure 9 Distribution of Barangay  

32 | Page   After determining the missing values, the researchers look for the distribution of each 
feature, as shown in figure 12. The San Jose Gusu has the most da ta samples in the distribution 
visualization  for the feature  of barangay,  and barangay  Putik  is the least.  In this scenario,  it can say 
that there will be bias in predicting the house price because the distribution is  unbalanced.  
Figure 10 Distribution of Classification  
 
 
In this feature  of Classification,  the distribution  of sample  data is imbalanced  because  there 
are 129 samples for residential, which estimates for 89.58 percent of all the data collected, and 15 
samples for commercial, which accounts for only 10.42 percent of the total data, the housing  price 
estimate could be erroneous. Since the data cannot be dropped or removed to have an equal 
distribution so, to achieve the 80% accuracy rate of the model, the researchers used a different 
algorithm tha t fits the number of data  has. 
 
Figure 11 Distribution for Doors  

33 | Page   As shown in figure 11 above, wood is the most common with 53 (38.13 percent) data 
samples,  followed  by a flush  with 39 (28.06  percent),  panel  door with 27 (19.42  percent),  roll with 
8 (5.76 percent), HCPD or Customs Panel Doors with 7 (5.04 percent), glass with only 3 (2.16 
percent), and plywood with 2 (1.44 percent). Because of the unbalanced data for the last four data 
occurrences, the prediction in this feature may be  biased.  
 
Figure 12  Pearson Correlation  
 
 
It can observe from this correlation that the Floor area is the most significant or relevant 
feature in predicting market value.  
 
 
 
Figure 13 Scatter Plot (Floor Area)  

34 | Page    
 
 
Figure 14 Scatter Plot (Land Area)  
 
 
As shown in figure 15, the floor area and the land area is the most relevant feature in 
predicting the market value of a house property. It shows a positive correlation in predicting the 
data model.  
 
Real -Estate Property Field Appraisal Sheet – Land 
 
 
Figure 15 Feature Statistics (Checking for null or missing values)  
 
 
The model was split into two parts: one for the house pricing model and another for the 
land model. Figure 17 shows the data's feature statistics for the land dataset, including the mean, 
median, dispersion, min, max, and missing values. Since there are no missing values in the land 
dataset, it was skipped on that part using the median to fill the gaps.  

35 | Page    
 
 
 
Figure 16 Scatter Plot (Barangay)  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17 Scatter Plot (Classification)  
 
 
In data analysis for the distribution of data, the barangay, and the classification has 
unbalanced  the contribution  of data.  In Figure  18, the Distribution  of Barangay  shows  that the data 
is unbalanced.  Zone  3 has 27 samples,  equivalent  to 17.20%  of the total data,  Zone  2 got 25 samples 
(15.92%), Zone 1 has 22 samples (14.01%), Tetuan has 20 samples (12.74%), Santa Maria has 18 
samples  (11.46%),  Tugbungan  has 14 samples  (8.92%)  same  with San Jose Gusu,  San Roque  with 
9 samples (5.73%), Zo ne 4 with 6 samples and only 2 (1.27%) samples for Pasonanca. For the 
Classification, the commercial has 114 samples, 72.61% of the total data, and 27.39% for 
Residential with 43  samples.  

36 | Page    
Figure 18 Pearson Correlation  
 
 
Since the Pearson Correlation was used to determine what is the most relevant feature in 
predicting the Land price, it resulted in only one, which is the Land Area.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 19 Scatter Plot -Categorial (Barangay)  
 
 
 
 
Figure 20 Scatter Plot -Categorial (Classification)  

37 | Page    
In the figures above, the scatter plot for the categorical feature, the barangay, and 
classification reveals that Zone 3 has the highest market price, as indicated by yellow marks. The 
commercial data has the highest market worth, which is between 10,000,000 and 12,500,000.00 
Philippine pesos, according to the data.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 21 Scatter Plot (Land Area)  
 
 
 
As shown in Figure 21, the land area is the most relevant feature in predicting the market 
value of land property. It shows a positive  correlation in predicting the data model.  

38 | Page    
Initial Strategy, Regression  
 
 
Figure 22 Means and Median  
 
 
 
The initial strategy that has used to find the prediction of houses and lots is the use of a 
linear regression algorithm. The researchers had faced difficulty in using it because the accuracy 
was so low that they could not even reach half of the target acc uracy rate. The outliers are too far 
from the trendline. Since there are many missing values, the highest missing value, which is the 
Structural Type and Stairs was dropped . After removing these, the strings or categorical  data were 
converted into numerica l data so they could be readable by the model. For other features, Median 
Statistics was used to get the missing values. See Figure 24. The median was used to get the most 
common value, and that value was used as anonymous in filling in those missing value s. The 
researchers did not use the Mean statistics because there is a tendency that a whole number would 
be decimal, and if that happens, it will take time to convert it again to a whole  number.  
 
After converting all the categorical data and filling it up into the missing values with 
median statistics, next is to proceed to data processing.  
For data processing, the following algorithms were used;  
o Linear  Regression  

39 | Page   o Ridge  Regression  
o Gradient  Boosting  
 
Initial Strategy, Results  
 
 
The results for the initial strategy were inconclusive at the least. The result for the 
processing  has reached  the 80% of accuracy  for all the regression  algorithms.  The model  scores  are 
shown in Table  4. 
 
● For regression  model  must  be considered  good,  the following  assumption  must 
be met: 
● The coefficient of determination or the R -Square(R²) score of the model has 
reach the 0.8 or 80% and above for gradient  boosting.  
● The Mean Squared Error (MSE) and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) are 
very low in all regression algorit hm that researchers used, that will be 
considered as poor or not reliable metric in comparing the performance of the 
models.  
● Also, the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) is not reliable metric because it has a 
low value.  
 
 
Algorithms  MAE  MSE  RMSE  R² 
Linear  
Regression  466568.205  1382321751940.308  683.05  0.83 
Ridge  
Regression  169393.23  36759305696.917  411.574  0.80 
Gradient  
Boosting  120745.617  25211587219.354637  347.484  0.93 
Table 4 Model Scores  
 
 
The following metrics indicate that the model developed seems  to be of poor quality. 
Despite  of intensive  testing  and data processing.  But the R² Model  scores  indicate  that the gradient 
boosting model performed significantly better than the linear and ridge  regression.  
40 | Page    
Model  Parameter  
Ridge Regression  Alpha=0.5  
Fit Intercept=True  
Gradient Boosting  No. of estimators = 100 
Max Depth = 3  
Min Samples Split = 2  
Learning Rate = 0.3  
Table 5 Model Parameters  
 
 
Table 5 shows the model parameters that were determined to achieve the accuracy 
of the model score for the algorithms.  
 
 
 
Figure 23 Residuals (Actual vs. Predicted prices)  
 
 
Figure  23 shows  the residuals  plot that the errors  follow  in a distribution  around  the 0 value 
of the x -axis, and it does not form exactly in the specific near 0  point.  

41 | Page    
 
 
Figure 24 Gradient Boosting Confusion Matrix  
 
 
Figure 24 shows the confusion matrix of the Gradient Boosting model. It is shown on the 
presentation that the actual price is on the y -axis and the predicted price on the x -axis. The 1 
repre sents  True,  and the 0 represents  False.  This shows  the interception  of the x-axis (Actual  price) 
and the y -axis (Predicted price) in the datapoint. The results are inconclusive; however, the 
accuracy rate reaches the target rate of  80%.  
 
After visualizing and analyzing the errors of the different algorithms that have been used, 
It was reviewed,  and the results  on the use of the R² metrics  of Gradient  Boosting  in developing  the 
model have the highest accuracy among the other  algorithms.  
 
Gradient Boosting Implementation and Model Evaluation  
 
 
This section  describes  all regression  algorithms  used and implemented  in Jupyter  notebook 
integrated development environment for the data cleaning, data processing, evaluation, and 
deployment of the model to the actual  presentation system. The researchers used Orange Data 
Mining  – a software  application  to visualize  graphs,  distribution  of data,  scatter  plots,  and confusion 
matrix.  

42 | Page    
Among the algorithms that have been used, the Gradient Boosting was the best choice in 
evaluating  the model  since  its accuracy  is consistent,  and it has reached  the target  of 80% accuracy 
score. It also shows that the model that have developed has a positive result in predicting house 
prices.  
 
For the deployment  of the model  into the system,  the package  of Pickle  file was used.  After 
creating  the pickle  file, the model  pickle  file was imported  to the function  form.  The System  already 
provided the form for the user to input the information of House and Lot, and after clicking the 
submit button, it will bring the form to the functions containing all the data needed to fit in the 
model. After fitting the data, now assign the variable prediction = model.predict(data[x])[0]. The 
model will predict and will pass the result or the pr edicted value to variable prediction, and it will 
submit it back to the System. Overall, the whole system successfully predicts the price of a house 
and lot despite the adjustments and errors that have been faced in developing the  system.  
 
Possible Reason of the Results  
 
Although  the scores  of the house  and land accuracy  show  an acceptable  result  of the study, 
there were still underlying problems that could have affected the results. Due to the pandemic, the 
approach or the way the researchers wanted to gather the data needed was limited. The movement 
of the transactions, the number of people, and the offices available were limited. Some of the data 
are confidential, which may also cause the lack, and enough data have for the model to  work. 
43 | Page   CHAPTER V  
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
 
Conclusion  
 
The web -based price prediction system with the use of Gradient Boosting has shown 
acceptable  scores  and was proven  to be effective  in predicting  the price  of a house  and lot property. 
Due to the pandemic,  the collected  data were  limited.  Thus,  the created  model  was fed with a limited 
amount of data. Although the results showed a positive effect on the independent variable and the 
dependent variable, due to the lack and a limited number of data nee ded, the results can be further 
improved and can give a higher accuracy rate. As the researchers have performed the prediction, 
there are some changes made during the methodology stage. The first algorithm that is used is the 
Linear Regression algorithm. S ince the data gathered is limited and due to many missing values,  it 
used other algorithms to find out which gives an acceptable accuracy rate despite the lack of data. 
The Ridge Regression and Gradient Boosting were used as an alternative algorithm, and t he result 
shows that Gradient Boosting gives the accepted accuracy rate of 80% despite the lack of data. 
Since the main purpose of this is to predict the price of a property at 80%, it was decided to use 
Gradient Boosting as the main algorithm in the predi ction model. Upon using this algorithm, the 
Floor Area and the Lot Area are factors to have a high impact on the price of a property. These 
findings may be differed from other related studies because of some factors affecting the result 
such as limited dat a, but this can also prove that the floor area and lot area of a house and land 
property are considered to be a great factor in pricing a  property.  
 
In summary, although the unexpected pandemic caused alterations and adjustments to the 
data gathering proce dure, the prediction system was still able to show acceptable results despite 
some problems encountered during the process. This study's outcome could be enhanced further, 
resulting in greater and better performance in terms of  accuracy.  
44 | Page   Reco mmendations  
 
The prediction  system  may have reached  the minimum  requirements  and accomplished  the 
objectives of the study, but further improvements can help improve the effectiveness of the 
prediction  system.  
 
It is recommended that future researchers consider the following:  
 
 
1. Adding more data for both house and land  datasets.  
2. To survey a larger population for better improvements to the  system.  
3. Use other algorithms to compare the prediction model using the same dataset you have 
gathered.  
4. Expand the scope of the study and have a wide range of  locations.  
5. Try to consider increasing or decreasing the number of datasets utilized in each method  or 
algorithm to see if the result is the same as  expected.  
45 | Page   References  
 
[1] Abdulal, A., & Aghi, N. (202 0). House Price Prediction . diva -portal.org. Retrieved April 
7, 2022, from  https://diva -portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1456610/FULLTEXT01.pdf  
[2] Ashfaque,    J.    M.  (2020,   July).  What    is   Machine   Learning?  researchgate.net.  
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/343231033_What_is_Machine_Learning.pdf  
[3] Avanija, J., Sunitha, G., Madhavi, K. R., Kora, P., & Sai Vittal , R. H. (2021, April 5). 
Prediction of house price using XGBoost regression algorithm . Researchgate. Retrieved 
March  26, 2022,  from  https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Padmavathi -Kora - 
2/publication/350810698_Prediction_of_House_Price_Using_XGBoost_Regression_A lg 
orithm/links/6074173b92851c8a7bbef01b/Prediction -of-House -Price -Using -XGBoost - 
Regression -Algorithm.pdf  
[4] B.Vijay Kumar, B.Ashritha, Ch.Teja, M.Vineeth, "HOUSE PRICE PREDICTION USING 
GRADIENT BOOST REGRESSION MODEL", IJRAR - International Journal  of 
Research an d Analytical Reviews (IJRAR), E -ISSN 2348 -1269, P - ISSN 2349 -5138, 
Volume.7, Issue 1, Page No pp.52 -55, March 2020, Available  at 
: http://www.ijrar.org/IJRAR2001569.pd f   
[5] Baldominos,  A., Blanco, I., Moreno,  A., Iturrarte,  R., Bernárdez,  Ó., & Afonso,  C. (2018). 
Identifying Real Estate Opportunities Using Machine Learning. Applied Sciences , 8(11), 
2321.  https://doi.org/10.3390/app8112321  
[6] Dann, C., Grohmann, J., Ho, A., Khoo, S., Kim, A., & Lal, S. (2020). The Hedonic House 
Price Model in a Development Context – Evidence from the National Capital Region of the 
Philippines, 2000 - 2010. Rationale , 1, 23–58. 
[7] Gaurav,  & Aalam,  Z. (2018).  Predic tion of House  Price  Using  Machine  Learning  Approach , 
5(11, 2018), 67 –69. http://www.ijsrd.com/articles/IJSRDV5I110013.pdf  
[8] Global Property. (2020). Philippines’ housing market is now very weak amidst an ailing 
economy . Philippines'  housing  market  is now very weak  amidst  an ailing  economy.  Retrieved 
April 8, 2022, from  https://www.globalpropertyguide.com/news -philippines -housing - 
market -is-now-very-weak -amidst -an-ailing -economy -4247 
[9] Ho, W. K. O., Wong,  S. W., & Tang,  B.-S. (2020,  October).  Predicting  property  prices  with 
machine learning algorithms . Retrieved March 26, 2022, from  
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/346308101_Predicting_property_prices_with_ma  
chine_learning_algorithms  
46 | Page   [10] Imran, Zaman, U., Waqar, M., & Zaman, A. (2021). Using Machine Learning Algorithms 
for Housing Price Prediction: The Case of Islamabad Housing Data. koreascience.or.kr. 
Retrieved  April  7, 2022,  from 
https://www.koreascience.or.kr/article/JAKO202122260767075.pdf  
[11] Kokasih,  M. F., & Para,  A. S. (2020,  September  30). Property  Rental  Price  Prediction  Using 
the Extreme Gradient Boosting Algorithm . ijiis.org. Retrieved April 7, 2022, from  
http://ijiis.org/index.php/IJIIS/article/download/65/27  
[12] Monika, R., Nithyasree, J., Valarmathi, V., Hemalakshmi, G. R., & Prakash, N. B. (2021, 
May 10). House price forecasting using machine learning methods . Turkish Journal of 
Computer and Mathematics Edu cation (TURCOMAT). Retrieved April 8, 2022, from  
https://turcomat.org/index.php/turkbilmat/article/view/6435  
[13] Revend,  W. (2020,  September  8). Predicting  House  prices  on the count ryside  using  boosted 
decision trees . DIVA. Retrieved April 1, 2022, from  https://kth.diva - 
portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A1464970  
[14] Sahithi, B., Saheli, T., Ramanika, D., & Anil Kumar, N. (2020). Crop Price Prediction 
System using Machine learning Algorithms . www.questjournals.org.  Retri eved April 7, 
2022, from  http://questjournals.org/jses/papers/Vol6 -issue -1/B06011420.pdf  
[15] Singh, S., & Nag K J, M. (2020, September 30). Land price prediction using machine 
learning algorithm . IRJET. Retrieved April 8, 2022, from  
https://www.academia.edu/44199114/IRJET_Land_Price_Prediction_using_Machine_Lear  
ning_Algorithm  Retrieved  April  8, 2022,  from 
https://www.aca demia.edu /44199114/IRJET_Land_Price_Predic tion_using_Machine_Lear  
ning_Algorithm  
[16] Sohlberg,  M. (2021,  March  5). Philippines  Real Estate  Market  Outlook  in 2021:  A Complete 
Overview . Asia Property HQ.  https://www.asiapropertyhq.com/philippines -real-estate - 
market/  
[17] Uzut,  G., & Buyrukoglu,  S. (2020,  May).  PREDICTION  OF REAL  ESTATE  PRICES  WITH 
DATA MINING ALGORITHMS . researchgate.net. Retrieved April 6, 2022, from  
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/342782159_Prediction_of_real_estate_ prices_wit  
h_data_mining_algorithms  
[18] Ziweritin, S., Ukegbu, C., Taiwo Adisa Oyeniran, T. A., & Ulu, I. O. (2021, February). A 
Recommendation Engine to Estimate Housing Values in Real Estate Property Market . 
researchgate.net.  Retrieved  April  6, 2022,  from 
47 | Page   https://www.researchgate.net/publication/349668577_A_Recommendation_Engine_to_Esti  
mate_Housing_Values_in_Real_Estate_Property_Market  
48 | Page   Appendix A 
Gantt Chart  
 
Figure 25 Gantt Chart  

49 | Page   Appendix B 
Evaluation Tool  
 
Gradient Boosting  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 16  Distribution  (Barangay)  Fig. 17 Pearson  Correlation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 16  Scatter  Plot Fig. 17 Residuals (Actual vs. Predicted  prices  

50 | Page    
 
Fig. 18 Confusion Matrix  

51 | Page    
Appendix C  
Photo Documentation of Testing  
 
Photo Documentation of Testing  
Figure 26 Data samples (Testing)  

52 | Page    

53 | Page    
 
Figure 27 Screenshot of system Testing  

54 | Page   Appendix D 
Algorithms  
 
Regression  
 
 
 
Figure 28 Linear Regression Best Fit line – residuals in black (Thomas, 2013)  
 
 
 
Ridge Regression  
 
Figure 29 Ridge Regression  

55 | Page   Gradient  Boosting  
 
 
Figure 30 Decision Tree Regression (Girgin. 2019)  

56 | Page   Appendix E 
Relevant Source Code  
 
Relevant Source Code: 
https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLeo1K3hjS3uu7clOTtwsp94PcHbzqpAdg  
https://youtu.be/yNwpn9Bh4DA  
 
Web Application Source  Code:  
https://git hub.com/FranciscoJamesKheil/broker.git  
 
 
Machine Learning Model Source Code:  
https://github.com/FranciscoJamesKheil/gradientBoosting_model_broker.git  
 
 
Data Model C ode Snippet 1 (Fitting)  
 
from sklearn import ensemble  
from sklearn .inspection import permutation_importance  
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split (X, y, test_size =0.1, random_state =20) 
params = { 
"n_estimators" : 100, 
"max_depth" : 3, 
"min _samples_split" : 2, 
"learning_rate" : 0.3, 
"loss" : "squared_error" , 
} 
reg = ensemble .GradientBoostingRegressor (**params ) 
reg.fit(X_train , y_train ) 
57 | Page   Data Model Code Snippet 2 (Web application Integration)  
# Implementing model to system  
 
import pickle 
import numpy as np 
 
    locations = None  
    data_columns = None  
 
modelhouse = pickle .load(open ('./broker/model/model.pkl' ,'rb')) 
@views .route ('/predict_house_price' , methods =['GET' ,'POST' ]) 
def predict_house_price (): 
brgy = request .form ['brgy' ] 
land_area = request .form ['land_area' ] 
floor_area = request .form ['floor_area' ] 
classification = request .form ['classification' ] 
storey = request .form ['storey' ] 
roof_framing = request .form ['roof_framing' ] 
roofing = request .form ['roofing' ] 
ext_walls = request .form ['ext_walls' ] 
flooring = request .form ['flooring' ] 
doors = request .form ['doors' ] 
ceiling = request .form ['ceiling' ] 
windows = request .form ['windows' ] 
wall_finish = request .form ['wall_finish' ] 
elect_conduit = request .form ['elect_conduit' ] 
toilet = request .form ['toilet' ] 
plumbing = request .form ['plumbing' ] 
 
brgy1 = request .form ['brgy1' ] 
classification1 = request .form ['classification1' ] 
roof_framing1 = request .form ['roof_framing1' ] 
roofing1 = request .form ['roofing1' ] 
ext_walls1 = request .form ['ext_walls1' ] 
flooring1 = request .form ['flooring1' ] 
doors1 = request .form ['doors1' ] 
ceiling1 = request .form ['ceiling1' ] 
windows1 = request .form ['windows1' ] 
wall_finish1 = request .form ['wall_finish1' ] 
elect_conduit1 = request .form ['elect_conduit1' ] 
toilet1 = request .form ['toilet1' ] 
plumbing1 = request .form ['plumbing1' ] 
 
list_of_others = 
[brgy,land_area ,floor_area ,classification ,storey ,roof_framing ,roofing ,ext_walls ,flooring , 
doors ,ceiling ,windows ,wall_finish ,elect_conduit ,toilet ,plumbing  
] 
list_of_sub = 
[brgy1 ,land_area ,floor_area ,classification1 ,storey ,roof_framing1 ,roofing1 ,ext_walls1 ,flooring1 , 
58 | Page   doors1 ,ceiling1 ,windows1 ,wall_finish1 ,elect_conduit1 ,toilet1 ,plumbing1  
] 
final_list = [] 
 
others = 0 
push = 0 # push data on the list  
 
for x in list_of_others : 
if x == 'others' : 
final_list .append (list_of_sub [push]) 
others = others + 1 
else: 
final_list .append (x) 
 
push = push + 1 
 
if others > 0: 
prediction = 0.00 
else: 
# convert final list to text  
brgylist = ['canelar' ,'divisoria' ,'putik' ,'san jose cawa -cawa' , 'san jose gusu' , 'santa maria' , 'tetuan' ] 
classlist = ['commercial' , 'residential' ] 
framinglist = ['c-purlins' ,'galvanized iron' ,'lumber' ,'open deck' ,'reinforced concrete' , 
'steel' ,'wooden' ] 
roofinglist = ['corr. / galvanized iron' ,'concrete' ,'galvanized iron' ,'long span' , 'open deck' , 
'plywood' , 'reinforced concrete' , 's-tile'] 
ext_wallslist = ['adobe type' , 'cement plaster' ,'concrete hallow block (chb)' , 'painted' , 'wood' ] 
flooringlist = ['concrete' ,'tiles' , 'wood' ] 
doorslist = ['flush' , 'glass', 'hcpd/wfpd' ,'panel' ,'plywood' ,'roll up' ,'wood' ] 
ceilinglist = ['plywood' ,'reinforced concrete' ,'unfinished' , 'wood' ] 
windowslist = ['aluminum casement' ,'french window' , 'glass' ,'jalousie' ,'scfw' ,'steel 
casement' ,'wfpd' ,'wood' ] 
wallfinishlist = ['adobe' ,'cement plaster' ,'concrete hallow block (chb)' ,'plain cement paint' ,'sand 
blast' ,'wood' ] 
electconlist = ['breakers' ,'concealed' ,'conduit pipe' ,'mouldflex' ,'open' ,'painted' ,'pdx electrical 
wire' ,'polyflex' ,'polyvinyl chloride (pvc)' ,'tube' ,'unplastic ized polyvinyl chloride (upvc)' ] 
toiletlist = ['concrete hallow block' ,'tiles' ,'wood' ] 
plumbinglist = ['galvanized iron' ,'open' ,'polyvinyl chloride (pvc)' ] 
 
brgy = brgylist .index (brgy) 
classification = classlist .index (classification ) 
roof_framing = framinglist .index (roof_framing ) 
roofing = roofinglist .index (roofing ) 
ext_walls = ext_wallslist .index (ext_walls ) 
flooring = flooringlist .index (flooring ) 
doors = doorslist .index (doors ) 
ceiling = ceilinglist .index (ceiling ) 
windows = windowslist .index (windows ) 
wall_finish = wallfinishlist .index (wall_finish ) 
59 | Page   elect_conduit = electconlist .index (elect_conduit ) 
toilet = toiletlist .index (toilet ) 
plumbing = plumbinglist .index (plumbing ) 
 
global  data_columns 
global  locations  
 
with open ("./broker/model/ columns.json" , "r") as f: 
    data_columns = json.load(f)['data_columns' ] 
    locations = data_columns [0:] 
 
x = np.zeros (len( data_columns )) 
x[0] = brgy 
x[1] = land_area 
x[2] = floor_area 
x[3] = classification 
x[4] = storey  
x[5] = roof_framing 
x[6] = roofing  
x[7] = ext_walls 
x[8] = flooring 
x[9] = doors 
x[10] = ceiling 
x[11] = windows  
x[12] = wall_finish 
x[13] = elect_conduit 
x[14] = toilet  
x[15] = plumbing  
 
 
prediction = modelhouse .predict([ x])[0] 
 
 
tablea = final_list [0] 
tableb = final_list [1] 
tablec  = final_list [2] 
tabled = final_list [3] 
tablee = final_list [4] 
tablef = final_list [5] 
tableg = final_list [6] 
tableh = final_list [7] 
tablei = final_list [8] 
tablej = final_list [9] 
tablek = final_list [10] 
tablel = final_list [11] 
tablem = final_list [12] 
tablen  = final_list [13] 
tableo = final_list [14] 
tablep = final_list [15] 
60 | Page     
return render_template ("total.html" , 
a=tablea ,b=tableb ,c=tablec ,d=tabled ,e=tablee ,f=tablef ,g=tableg ,h=tableh ,i=tablei ,j=tablej ,k=tablek ,l=t 
ablel ,m=tablem ,n=tablen ,o=tableo ,p=tablep , prediction_alert ="{:,.2f} ".format (prediction ), 
user=current_user , fname =current_user .first_name, lname =current_user .last_name)  
61 | Page   Appendix F 
Screenshot/Picture of the System  
 
 
Figure 31 Landing Page of the System  

62 | Page    
Figure 32 Registration Page of the System  

63 | Page    
 
Figure 33 Login Page of the System  

64 | Page    
Figure 34 Market page of the system  
 
 
 
Figure 35 Sell property (core of the study)  

65 | Page    
 
 
 
Figure 36 House prediction  form  
 
 
 
 
Figure 37 House estimated  price  

66 | Page    
 
Figure 38 Land prediction  form  
 
 
 
 
Figure 39 Land estimated  price  

67 | Page    
 
 
Test Cases  Appendix G  
Test Cases and Results  
 
Project Name:  House and Lot  price prediction using Gradient Boosting in 
Zamboanga City  
Module Name:  Login  
Reference Document:  House and Lot Test Plan  
Date of creation:  October 12, 2021  
Date of review:  April 1, 2022  
 
 Test 
Case ID  Test 
Scen  
ario Test 
Case  Pre- 
Condi 
tion Test 
Steps  Test 
Data  Expect 
ed 
Result  Post 
Condi 
tion Actu 
al 
Resul 
t Status 
(Pass/Fa 
iled)  
Login_Us 
er_01  Verif 
y the 
user's 
accou  
nt Enter 
valid 
email 
and 
valid 
passw  
ord Requir 
es a 
valid 
user’s 
accou 
nt to 
login  1. 
Enter 
email 
addre 
ss <valid 
email 
addres  
s>  
 
Logged 
in   
successf 
ully!  House 
and 
Lot 
Marke  
t Page 
displa 
yed Hous 
e and 
Lot 
Mark 
et 
Page 
displa  
yed  
 
 
PASS  
Login_Us 
er_01  Verif 
y the 
user's 
accou  
nt Enter 
valid 
email 
and 
invali 
d 
passw  
ord Requir 
e a 
valid 
user’s 
accou 
nt to 
login  1. 
Enter 
email 
addre  
ss <valid 
email 
addres  
s>  
 
 
 
Incorrec 
t      
passwor 
d, try 
again.   
 
 
 
Error 
messa 
ge 
promp  
t  
 
 
 
Error 
messa 
ge 
prom 
pt  
 
 
 
 
 
PASS  2. 
Enter 
passw  
ord <invali  
d 
passw 
ord>  
3. 
Click 
“Logi 
n” 
butto  
n  
Login_Us 
er_01  Verif 
y the 
user's 
accou  
nt Enter 
invali  
d 
email  
and Requir 
e a 
valid 
user’s  
accou  1. 
Enter 
email 
addre  
ss <invali  
d 
email 
addres  
s> Email  
does 
not 
exist.  Error 
messa 
ge 
promp  
t Error 
messa 
ge 
prom  
pt  
 
PASS  
68 | Page     valid 
passw  
ord nt to 
login  2. 
Enter 
passw  
ord <valid  
passw 
ord>      
3. 
Click 
“Logi 
n” 
butto  
n  
Login_Us 
er_01  Verif 
y the 
user’s  
accou 
nt Enter 
invali 
d 
email 
and 
invali 
d 
passw  
ord Requir 
e a 
valid 
user’s 
accou 
nt to 
login  1. 
Enter 
email 
addre  
ss <invali  
d 
email 
addres  
s>  
 
 
 
 
Email  
does 
not 
exist.   
 
 
 
Error 
messa 
ge 
promp  
t  
 
 
 
Error 
messa 
ge 
prom 
pt  
 
 
 
 
 
PASS  2. 
Enter 
passw  
ord <invali  
d 
passw 
ord>  
3. 
Click 
“Logi 
n” 
butto  
n  
Table 6 Test Cases Report  
69 | Page    
 
 
Test Result Summary  Appendix H 
Bug Report
 
Table 7 Test Result Summary   
 
Build/Version   
 
Total Test Case   
Passed Test Case   
 
Failed Test Case   
 
Remarks  
1.0 4 4 0  
70 | Page   Appendix I 
Survey Questionnaire  
 
SURVEY FORM  
 
To Respondents:  
The researchers are students of Western Mindanao State University taking BS Computer 
Science and is currently working on a thesis entitled " Web -Based House and Lot Price Prediction 
using Gradient Boosting in Zamboanga City".  
The aim of the study is to determine what factors or attrib utes may influence the overall 
price  of the house  and lot property  and to provide  a system  with high predictive  results  as possible. 
The outcome of the study will answer the question what is the probability that the price predicted 
by the system is close enough to the actual price of the house and lot using a machine learning 
algorithm.  
Rest assured that your answers to this survey will be treated with the utmost confidentiality.  
The survey result will be analyzed and interpreted for academic purposes only . 
Your  cooperation  is highly  appreciated  as it will contribute  to the conduct  of the study  and 
will help the researchers analyze what are the factors that affects in calculating the cost of a house 
and lot property. Thank you, and stay  safe!  
 
Fullname: (Op tional) 
Occupation:  
Status:  
o Single  
o Married  
o Widowed  
o Other:  
1. Type of  Respondent:  
o Buyer  
o Seller  
o Investor  
o Real Estate  Agent  
o Researcher  
o Other:  
2. Do you desire to have your own house and  lot? 
o Yes 
o No 
o Maybe  
* If your answer in item no. 1 is  “Yes”  
3. In what location do you want to have your  house?  
o Residential  Area  
o Urban  Area  
o Rural  Area  
o Other:  
4. What do you consider the most in having your own house and lot  property?  
*Select all that applies.  
71 | Page    
o Backyard  
o Fence and  gate 
o Spacious  grounds  
o Balcony  
o Bedrooms  
o Garage  
o Spacious living  room  
o Bathroom  
o Parking  
o Dining and kitchen  area 
o Other:  
5. How many bedrooms do you want to  have?  
o 1-2 bedrooms  
o 3-5 bedrooms  
o 5 and  more  
6. How many bathrooms do you want to  have?  
o 1 only 
o 2 only 
o More than  2 
7. How much budget do you have to buy your desired house and  lot? 
o ₱ 300,000 - ₱ 500,000  
o ₱ 500,000 - ₱ 1.5M  
o ₱ 1.5M - ₱ 2M 
o ₱ 2M and  above  
8. Do you want to have an application that can help you predict the price of your dream  house?  
o Yes 
o No 
o Maybe  
72 | Page    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix J 
Curriculum Vitae  
73 | Page   
 
  
73 | Page   
 