“Anilab: An Augme nted Reality Mobile Application Used to 
Assist Teacher in Educating Elementary  Students”  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
Submitted by:  
Ella Jane B . Caraecle  
Feljan P. Sularte  
  
  
  
  
  
      
A Thesis Proposal Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements 
for the Degree  of Bachelor of Science in Computer Science  
      
      
      
      
Western Mindanao State University      
Institute of Computer Studies      
Philippines      
June 2021       
      
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
List of tables ………………………………… …………………… …………..  
List of figures .………………………………… ………………….. ………….  
Chapter 1 -Introduction …………………… ………………….. ……….……  
1.1. Background of the Study  .…..………………….. ..…………… ……….  
1.2 Statement of the Problem ………………. ……………… ………. ….… 
1.3 Objectives … …………………… ………………………………... .....… 
1.4. Significance of the study ………………….. ……………..………….……  
1.5. Scope and Limitations  …………… …………………. ………………….  
1.6. Operational Definition ……… ……………….. ……………………….   
1.7. Conceptual Framework ……………….. …………………………..……  
Chapter 2. Review of Related Literature  …………………………………..  
2.1. Related Literature …………… ……………….. ………………………………….  
2.1.1. Online  Learning …………… ………………….. …………………………………  
2.1.2. Online Learning  Success  …………………………………………………………  
2.1.3. Online Learning  Challenges  …………………………………………………….  
2.1.4. Augmented Reality ……………………………………………………………….  
2.1.5. Augmented Reality vs Virtual Reality ………………………………………….  
2.1.6. Mobile Augmented Reality …………………………..…………………………  
2.2. Related Studies ………………………………………………………………………  
2.2.1 Foreign Studies  …………………………………..…… ………………………….  
2.2.2 Local Studies ………………………………………………………………..…..…  
Chapter 3. Methodology  ………………………………………………………………  
3.1.   Research Design …………………………………………………………  
3. 2. System Application Design  …………………………………………… . 4 
4 
5 
5 
7 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
12 
12 
14 
17 
19 
20 
23 
25 
25 
28 
30 
31 
31 
 
 3.3 Marker Based Procedure ………………………………………………..  
3.4. Vuforia ……………………………………………………………..…….  
3.5. User Case Diagram  ……………………………………………………………….…  
3.6. Research Materials …………………………………………………………………  
3.6.1 Software ……………………………………………………………………………  
3.6.2. Hardware …………………………………………………………………………  
3.7. Research Locale  …………………………………………………………………….  
3.8. Population and Sampling  ………………………………………………  
3.9. Research Instruments ………………………………………………………..……  
3.10. Validity of Instruments  ……………………………………………………………  
3.11. Data Gathering Procedure  ………………………………………………………..  
3.12. Statistical t ool ………………………………………………………………………  
Chapter  4 Results and Discussions  …………………………………………………….  
4.1 Samples and Population  …………………………………………………  
4.2. Online Learning …………………………………………………………..…………  
Chapter 5. Conclusion and Recommendation ………………………………………..  
5.1. Conclusion …………………………………………………………………………..  
5.2. Recommendation …………………………………………………………………  
References ………………………………………………………………………………  
Appendices ………………………………………………………………………………  
Survey form …………………………………………………………………………….  
 32 
34 
34 
34 
34 
35 
35 
36 
36 
37 
37 
38 
39 
39 
40 
46 
46 
46 
47 
51 
52 
  
 
List of Tables  
LIST OF TABLES  
Table 4.1 Distribution of Respondents According to Category ……….. ….. 
Table 4.2 Responses of Students  ……………………………… …………….  
Table 4.3 Responses of Teachers  ………………………… ...………………  
Table 4.4 Pie chart on Rating online Learning  …………………………….  
Table 4.5  Usefulness of Video games in Learning or Teaching  ………….  
Table 4. 6. Pie chart on Responses on related app  ………. ………….. ……  
 Table 4. 7. Percentage of Response on focus during this pandemic ………  
Table 4. 8. Pie Chart of respondents doing well ………………… ..………  
   Table 4.9. Rating s in terms of entertainment  …………………………… . 
Table.4. 10 ANILAB as an additional material ……………………….……..  
Table 4.1 1 Pie Chart  of ANILAB in enhancing knowledge  ……..…………  
Table 4.1 2 ANILAB as a material in studying and teaching …… ..…           
Table 4.1 3.  Rating of ANILAB in terms of educational content  ……………  
Table 4.1 4. Rating o f ANILAB in terms of systems functionality…… ….. 
 39 
40 
40 
41 
 
42 
42 
43  
43 
 
44 
44 
45 
45 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
   
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  LIST OF FIGURES  
Figure 1. Conceptual Framework of proposed 
mobile application using Augmented 
Reality   11 
Figure 2.  Reality -virtuality continuum Taken from Yuan thesis   
 23 
Figure 3. Mobile Marker - Based Augmented Reality Application Design  
 31 
Figure 4. User Case Diagram  34 
 
Chapter 1.  Introduction      
1.1. Background of the Study      
 
Many people's lives were affected by the pandemic  cause d by Covi d – 19. The 
education sector is one of those hit by the Covid -19 pandemic. As a result, all 
classrooms have been transitioned to online classes, but teachers and students, 
especially those in elementary school, are finding it difficult to te ach/learn because they 
are accustomed to face -to-face instruction  or classroom setting . Students' required 
learning resources are readily available at their classrooms. Students were quickly bored 
even though  it was online and seemed to be easy. Elementary  students find it hard to 
understand to keep up with their classes. Hence, students' concentration and emphasis 
are lacking because they are still young.   
 
The online learning for both students and teachers has advantages and 
disadvantages, just like any other teaching method.   
 
The transition to online learning for all students is very effective this teaching 
method provides another way to minimize the conn ection between students or between 
students and teachers.  
 
An efficient way to visualize abstract concepts and support students’ 
interaction and engagement is the Augmented Reality (AR). Elementary pupils like to 
study and learn by using images or videos than learning through short messages 
services (SMS) of their teachers. Augment Reality is one of the solutions  of visualizing 
the learning process of the students. Through these technology, elementary students 
will have fun while learning.  Thus, using AR technology will be beneficial and helpful 
for the elementary teachers on teaching their lessons to their students.   
 
 The application of AR in education has been investigated at all educational 
levels, including early childhood education. In primary and s econdary education 
(Koutromanos, G.; Sofos, A.; Avraamidou,  2015) , as well as from elementary  school 
to university levels , (Scrivner, O.; Madewell, J.; Buckley, C.; Perez, N. December 
2016) . 
 
 Kindergarten pupils, K -12 students, university students, and ad ult learners are 
all examples of different sorts of learners. Elderly individuals, students in technical an d 
vocational higher education (Radosavljevic, 2018, Akçayır, M., 2017)  and students 
with special needs focused on a variety of study areas (for examp le, city history ), 
(Rodríguez, F.E., 2013, M.; Dede, C. 2014.)  B oth in formal and informal settings i n 
the framework of contextual learning theory (Rodríguez, F.E.;  2013 ) and constructivist 
learning, learning settings theory.  
 
 Augmented re ality (AR) has been described as "system that have the following 
three features: (1) combine real and virtual, (2) interactive in real time , and (3) 
registered in 3 -D." (Azuma, R.T. 1997, p. 2), while it is more broadly described as a 
state between actual a nd virtual surroundings (Milgram, P.; Takemura, H.; Utsumi, A.; 
Kishino, F, 2351, 282 –292)   .AR technology enables simultaneous interaction between 
the real and virtual worlds. Digital information (text, audio, images, video, 3D objects) 
is superimposed o n the real world in such a way that it appears to be a part of it. It does 
not isolate the user from the physical environment, which "is likely one of the key 
reasons for AR's growing popularity" . (Kounavis, C.D.; Kasimati, A.E.; Zamani, E.D. 
2012, 4, 1 –6p. 2).  
 
 Augmented reality apps are classified into two types: image -based applications 
and location -based applications. Image -based applications are further classified into 
two types:  (a) marker -based tracking, which requires specific labels (e.g., Quick  
Response Code), and (b) marker -less tracking, in which an image serves as the trigger 
for multimedia content playback. When a user arrives at a specific location, location -
based applications are activated.  
 
 1.2 Statement of the Problem  
  
   During the past year, due to a viral outbreak of a disease named "COVID -19", 
most countries has opted to promote social distancing and strict quarantine procedures 
to combat the spread of said epidemic. This has also resulted in many stud ents to take 
online classes as a replacement to campus lectures or classrooms following the 
quarantine guidelines. However, many students, including younger ones have often find 
this format of classes boring and thus hindering them from learning subjects n eeded for 
their future.   
 
The researchers would like to propose the use of augmented reality (AR) to 
better enhance the interest of students in learning, help them visualize things and to have 
an interaction for better learning experiences.   
 
 
 
 
1.3 Objec tives:   
 
The main goal of this research is to see the effectiveness and efficiency 
of Augmented Reality Application that would benefit both teachers and students 
where teachers could teach their students easily and students to easily 
understand their less ons.     
 
• To develop a marker -based  application using unity game engine.  
• To conduct a survey for students ages 10 to 12 years old on usability of the 
application.       
• To conduct a survey for the teachers to determine the system functionality and 
educational content of the app.      
• To validate the design and performance efficiency of the system.     
 
1.4. Significance of the Study      
      
• The Augmented Reality (AR) game application that was used  were beneficial 
for both elementary students and teachers.  
• It was less hassle and stress -free for the elementary teachers on how their 
students will learn their lesson.  
• Elementary students did not  only learn but have fun while learning their lessons  
  
1.5. Scope and Limitations      
  The researchers’ will develop an Augmented Reality application that will assist 
the teachers to teach the lessons to elementary students and help the elementary students 
to underst and and focus on their studies.  
1. The application was  marker -based  application due to the limited 
resources of the researchers.  
2. The application focuses  only on elementary science subject specifically, 
the human body skeletal system.  
3. The ap plication was limited to devices that are compatible with the 
google play service for AR.   
4. The hardware and software that was used in developing the application 
was also limited due to lack of resources of the researchers.  
5. The research is limited to stud ents across Zamboanga City Division's  
Baliwasan  District 's Grade 5 and Grade 6 classes.   
6. The following schools involved are Baliwasan Central School, San Jose 
Gusu Elementary School, Good Shepherd Missions School , Southern Support 
Command Elementary School , Ebenezer Bible Schools  and John Spring Elementary 
School are the elementary schools that make up this school district.       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.6. Operational Definition      
 
In this section, terms will be defined in relation to the researcher’s study. The 
following are the terms used in this study:     
     
 Augmented Reality – The application of sound, visual objects, or other 
sensory effects to a real -world environment.      
 Unity Engine game –   is a gaming engine used for the developing the mobile 
Augmented Reality.       
 Image recognition machine vision - is that the power of software to identify 
objects, places, people, writing and actions in images.     
     
 Image Tracking  –  detects two -dimensional planar pictures from a custom -
defined target collection and then continually monitors the pictures' positions and 
orientations as you or they move in the setting      
 Marker base - is a mobile device application that allows you to  scan physical 
photos, known as "markers," and then produce a 3D model, another picture, video,  Or 
scene, as well as interact with it using your smartphone      
 Vuforia Engine - is an Augmented Reality software development kit (SDK).     
 Learners - are elem entary school students who will use the program.     
 E learning - is defined as a learning system that includes both structured and 
informal learning through the use of technology resources.     
 Elementary Science Teacher - a person who teaches science subject.     
 
 
 
 
1.7 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK      
   
In this section, the main dependent variable is the learning in augmented Reality. 
The student user which is the independent variable that consist of Male and Female that 
are mediator variables which will be  the users of the application . The Subject topic 
which is also the independent variable that helps the students user to better understand 
topic that is dependent variable so that students able to learn and enhanced their 
learnings and knowledge on their l essons and easier to be able to understand the lessons.  
While the consistency is the use of augmented reality for the next output variables.      
    
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Conceptual Framework of proposed mobile app lication using Augmented Reality  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  

 
 
     
Chapter 2 .  Review of Related Literature  
     
2.1. RELATED LITERATURE      
2.1.1. ONLINE LEARNING      
Rodriguez et al. (2008) agreed, contending that sustaining enrollment in 
advanced education would be dependent on understudies' learning experiences 
and observations in an online format, an estimation also discussed by Dobbs, 
Waid, and Del Carmen (2009) an d Motargy and Boghikian -Whitby (2010). 
Various experts have recommended increased testing in this area (Allen and 
Sailor, 2008; Glass  and Sue, 2008; Powell, 2007).       
 
Advances in development of computer technology since the 1990s have 
achieved an extend ed usage of online devices in distance tutoring. Today, 
various establishments of higher learning offer online direction with fused 
electronic instructive gadgets (Rodriguez, Ooms, and Montanez, 2008). E -
learning is another effective method of improving go vernment assistance, 
especially in the organization chosen for this evaluation (Collins, Kim, and 
Amodeo, 2010; Donavant, 2009; P. Griffith, May 23, 2013 singular 
correspondence). Because of the recent growth in distance learning in the field 
of government  assistance, there is a lack of knowledge of how government 
benefits professionals perceive by using this kind of learning system.      
 
Online classes have been shown to be beneficial for students who choose 
self-directed instruction (You and Kang, 2014).  An understudy responded to 
online coursework in a Kirtman -led review says, "It is more private, so I can spend 
more resources on the ideas that I need assistance with and less in ideas that I can get 
quickly" (Kirtman, 2009, p. 110). Self -regulated studen ts are more likely to use a 
variety of "intellectual and metacognitive procedures to accomplish their learning goal" 
(You and Kang, 2014, p. 126). Students who can enhance their self -directed academic 
skills often used time management, audited content 6 We b-based LEARNING on a 
regular basis, sought assistance from instructors or peers, faced time limits, and used 
metacognition to consider their own lea rning (You and Kang, 2014).     
 
In a survey comparing teachers' and students' views on online education, 
(GayTan , 2015) discovered that students viewed improved online learning as the 
absolute most significant factor in maintaining on -site learning, with instructor 
experiences as the second most significant factor. Karma and Rossi (2015) discovered 
that when t eachers and students do not communicate, online students perceive 
distance to be more dominant, and that without contact, students experience feelings 
of hopelessness. Students perceive themselves to be more completely disconnected in 
on-line classes than the face -to-face classes and  disconnected but also less motivated 
to social community (Otter et al., 2013).     
 
Disconnection affects students’ academic understanding throughout the online 
learning, which can result in class frustration or withdrawal rates. Lowenthal, Bauer, 
and Chen (2015) used experiments to gather feedback from online students and 
discovered when positive feedback from online instructors or advice was rated lower 
than positive feedback from face -to-face instruction. Th e latest research by the Bill & 
Melinda Gates Foundation found that learning criticism enhanced students' 
performance, indicating there's a need to analyze students' perceptions of online classes.     
 
The interpretation of appropriate psychological and so cial education 
systems between students will encourage additional outstanding patience and 
encouragement to continue pursuing more online classes.     
 
The interpretation of appropriate psychological and social education 
systems between students will encou rage additional outstanding patience and 
encouragement to continue pursuing more online classes. For example, some 
research examined into the competence of behaviors and ways of thinking about 
improvement management of K to 12 curriculum government support ed 
educators in urban and rural setting. The  purpose was to investigate the 
connection between repeat use as well as opinion mostly on validity of internet 
learning devices depending on the type of school environment. Schools seemed 
to have the maximum lev el of development reliability, accompanied by their 
country peers. This data can be beneficial to online students and teacher in 
understanding the most productive developments, as well as work base to 
enhanced use of progress, especially in the country ass essment. To improve 
students' trial learning in the investigative corridor, renowned researcher 
developed an e - learning structure using a combination of structure methods and 
appropriate learning methods.  
       
Coordinating requests are expected to be suggestive of creative 
relationship to energize their inventive thinking. Through peer evaluation, 
understudies could acquire from others' thinking methodologies while appreciating and 
denouncing their creation. After the structure was made, an evaluation attempt was 
performed. Differentiated and the benchmark bunch, individuals who used the system 
to help forming showed tremendous redesigns after various occasions trainings. At that 
point, other assessment communicated that the standard "flipped homeroom" passes on 
address material in video setup to understudies outside of class to represent dynamic 
learning in class.       
   
The interpretation of appropriate psychological and social education systems 
between students will encourage additional outstanding patience and encouragement to 
continue pursuing more online classes.  For example, some research examined into the 
competence of behaviors and ways of thinking about improvement management of K 
to 12 curriculum government -supported educators in urban and r ural setting.   
 
The purpose was to investigate the connection between repeat use as well as 
opinion mostly on validity of internet learning devices depending on the type of school 
environment. Schools seemed to have the maximum level of development reliab ility, 
accompanied by their country peers. This data can be beneficial to online students and 
teacher in understanding the most productive developments, as well as work base to 
enhanced use of progress, especially in the country assessment. To improve stud ents' 
trial learning in the investigative corridor, renowned researcher developed an e - 
learning structure using a combination of structure methods and appropriate learning 
methods     
      
Reflexive multimedia illustrations combine with actual proof teaching 
methods to address known chaos environments for accessing learners. Each 
incorporates a live action scenario of understudies investigating a whiz concern 
with a sensible analysis wherein  clients participate. Clients are asked to make 
figures, answer questions, gather additional details, and draw conclusions over 
the duration of each ten -minute film. Spreading and imprinting previous 
responses allows each client  to have a remodeled interpr etation.     
     
Assessment of how students will learn from these devices is being used 
to cultivate whole modules that will meld the IVV as a planning creation to be 
done as homework, accompanied by suggested activities to be done in class to 
make the im plemented concepts more significant and more specific. The results 
of this study show that using an electronic investigation lobby was a major 
contributor to students' learning development.       
     
2.1.2 ONLINE LEARNING SUCCESS      
      
Online courses can be agreeable, testing, and give intellectual incitement 
at the point when understudies are locked in. Capra (2014) noticed that online 
students time the executives’ abilities and association with online educators 
upheld online understudy achievement. H amzah, Fortunate, and Joarder, (2014) 
and Pehlivan (2013) discovered a connection between students' academic 
achievement, time management skills, and that academically effective learners 
even manage their time properly. According to Hamzah et al. (2014), a cademic 
excellence should be enhanced by understudies further developing time 
management skill. 64 Besides that, Jaggars and Xu (2016) mentioned that in the online 
learning environment, teacher and students’ involvement, students’ connection, and 
cordial i nnovation have the largest impact on students' academic achievement.     
         
An online direction advertised during enlistment or upon enlistment in the school would 
additionally help underst udies in knowing their job , what teachers expect of online 
students, and the contrasts between understudies learning eye to eye versus web based 
learning conditions  (Bork and Ahidiana, 2013). An online approach advertised during 
registration either upon enrollment in the school will furthermore aid students in 
recog nizing their role as an online student, what teachers expect of online students, and 
the differences between understudies learning face to face versus web -based 
educational systems (Bork and Ahidiana, 2013). Providing different students online 
learning dir ection before course section has proven to be successful in converting them 
to this new way of learning (Haynie, 2014). Furthermore, the structure for internet 
learning increases learners' interest in learning, coordinates student autonomy, and 
enhances di scernment for scholarly achievement in students who take part in online 
courses (Krugers and Waters; Wang, Shannon, and Ross, 2013). The online education 
system anticipates that students can be successfully engaged with activities that 
promote the six prin ciples of Knowles' online learning concept (Allen and Zhang, 2016; 
Schultz, 2012). These principles highlight the student's ability to (a) promote a 
motivation or soreness for obtaining information, (b) enhance learning guide or 
structure, (c) self -concept ualize, (d) place oneself in an academic condition of 
accessibility to accomplish goals, (e) nurture concern based skills, and (f) become such 
a self -inspiration.     
     
2.1.3 ONLINE LEARNING CHALLENGES      
 
Educational technology continues to represent  mainstream culture and therefore 
restricts people outside the mainstream culture (Oswal and Meloncon, 2014). No 
technology is an area that can easily be taken for granted in daily life. This is not very 
common because there is no funding available for onl ine training. Ultimately, this leads 
to students gaining access to the global knowledge available on the Internet. "Technical 
exposure can bridge the gap between rich and poor, rich experience and extraordin ary" 
(Chaney, 2001, p. 28).  No technology is som ething that must be taken for granted in 
daily life. This is unusual because no funding is available for online study. Ultimately, 
students will have access to the global knowledge available on the Internet. "Technical 
exposure can cross the gap between po or and rich, extensive expertise and 
extraordinary" (Chaney, 2001, p. 28).     
Despite the benefits and promises o f distance learning, there are few issues that should 
be addressed, including the learning outcomes, costs involved, use of technology, and 
perceptions of teachers and students. The average product quality in online learning. 
Most of these concerns is connect ed to others in various ways.  Another challenge for 
online students is staying motivated in their classes. Students who lacked independenc e 
and self -motivation performed less than their classmates (Savenye, 2005).     
Students with a lack of self -regulation usually did not have enough time to complete 
the course. Orders therefore lead to inferior work or late orders altogether (You & Kang, 
2014). In general, "successful students tend to be more confident that they will be 
successful, have greater self -responsibility, greater self-organization  skills, and better 
skills and access to technology" (Savenye, 2005, p.2)      
      
Baron and Wright (2008) hold the following view: “It is not easy for teachers to 
introduce new literacy skills into the classroom, especially when two -thirds of teachers 
are unwilling to use technology” (page 292). Turbill (2001) pointed out three factors 
that prevent teac hers from using technology in the classroom: lack of time and 
experience to understand and learn software, lack of security, and lack of learning and 
support. Hansen (2008) and Businessman (2009)      
       
Brush (2007) defines these obstacles as one or m ore of the following: the need for 
technical support, time constraints, and lack of technology, including insufficient 
technical tools (such as hardware, software, computers, and other resources). 
Appropriate technical support must be obtained. Lack of kno wledge and skills can also 
cause teachers to be reluctant to use technology in the classroom. Class management 
knowledge leads to a lack of technology in the classroom. Class management skills 
include rules and procedures for computers, printers, monitors,  laptops and smart 
boards. Hugh and Brush (2007) also found that there are some institutional barriers that 
can prevent teachers from using technology in the classroom.      
Although the use of e -learning has all the advantages, its implementation will cause 
many problems in the education system. Therefore, the continuous separation of 
eLearning from the actual environment will undoubtedly lead to identification 
problems. And the personality of the student. Interaction in such a room is one of the 
main limitations. In this type of education, comprehensive and inclusive assistance is 
lost, and the principle of independence is challenged to a certain extent .On the other 
hand, be lieves that learning is not suitable for any type of education.      
 
2.1.4. AUGMENTED REALITY       
 
Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) technologies are becoming 
increasingly popular as hardware and software evolve, making them accessible for a 
variety of applications. This have been applied to different areas because of their 
potential to improve the user experience while learning.  Training, simulation, games 
or other tasks. This are the two most popular subsections of the broader concept of 
Augmented Reality (AR) as an umbrella term that encompasses both AR and VR. This 
is evident from the extensive review by S.Chuah.      
Unlike virtual reality, augmented reality attempts to enhance rather than replace one's 
personal environment. By utilizin g a technological lens that enables the user to see and 
interact with the information that surrounds us augmented reality on mobile allows 
users to interact with data on a more personal level. New technologies and applications 
in the fields of information search, entertainment, gaming, and location -based services 
such as tourism and directional mapping are rapidly emerging.   
 
2.1.5 Augmented reality vs. Virtual reality   
 
Augmented reality is frequently looked upon as a "center ground" between virtual 
reality and the physical climate (Milgram, 1994). In contrast to augmented reality and 
the physical world, the realm of virtual reality lies entirely within the synthetic. Virtual 
reality can be defined as, "a computer generated, interactive, three -­‐dimension al 
environment in which a person is immersed" (Aukstakalnis& Blatner, 1992). Virtual 
realities, such as those found in computer games like World of Warcraft and Second 
Life. Virtual reality can be experienced by the player through control of an avatar in a  
PC ­‐generated environment and presented on a computer screen. Users may also 
experience virtual environments by wearing head -­‐mounted displays such as those are 
commonly used by the military for training purposes.    
   
The fundamental difference betwee n virtual and augmented realty lies in the user 
perspective and immersion methods employed by each system. Virtual reality systems 
strive to be a completely immersive experience, similar to the level of immersion users 
experience with everyday living. In c ontrast, augmented reality distinguishes itself as a 
mixed reality” between two worlds by blending virtual elements within a genuine -‐
world environment (Milgram, 1994). Characterizing augmented reality: Although 
many researchers  have  broadened  the  def inition and scope  of augmented  reality, the 
most regularly accepted defining  criteria were brought about by Ronald Azuma in 1997 
(Zhou, 2008). Azuma states that augmented reality systems share the following three 
attributes:    
1. Combines genuine and virt ual items in this present reality.    
2. Possesses intelligence and is presented in genuine ­‐time.    
3. Registers and adjusts virtual and actual items with each other in 3D.    
The reasoning for these standards is to try not to restrict augmented reality to explicit 
innovations. Preceding Azuma, researchers had primarily   characterized increased 
reality using head -­‐mounted shows, an approach incapable to distinguish some AR and  
VR applications. These new criteria grow the applications  of augmented reality to 
handheld cell phones such as smartphones   and   screen ­‐based   frameworks that read 
specialized coded tags that can present augmented reality information on a stationary 
computer screen (Azuma, 1997).  
 
Augmented Reality introduces a new mode of interacting with the physical and virtual 
environments, while also improving the real -world user experience (Kesim and 
Ozarslan, 2012). According to Wu et al. (2013), augmented rea lity (AR) enables 
students to develop valuable activities and became one of the most important new 
technologies in education. Students will feel a realistic degree of reality when engaged 
in such a learning environment, due to the fact that AR will provide  opportunities for 
teaching and learning.   
 
The use of augmented reality (AR) in education is a hot research subject AR allows 
users to connect virtual objects to the real world to facilitate real -time interaction .The 
application research of augmented re ality in education still in its early phases, and no 
research on the role and consequences of augmented re ality in education is published . 
AR becomes much more usable because it eliminates the need for special equipment 
and can be used on mobile devices. M ost people now own mobile devices, and their 
use has expanded to have better access to AR no longer requires special equipment and 
can be easily used on computers or mobile devices.  AR supplements the real world 
with relatively little virtual information,  while VR mainly contains frequently used 
virtual information . The degree of virtual reality in the real world determines the type 
of technology needed to support AR, because different display and tracking 
technologies will lead to different degrees of imm ersion .   
   
Example of Software application of AR is the Pokémon GO mobile application that can 
be used on smartphones another example of the augmented reality technology is the 
Star Wars Jedi Challenges (Star Wars Jedi Challenges) mobile application, her e users 
are required to wear a headset. Today, many people have mobile devices and therefore 
can use AR The advancement of mobile technology and the widespread use of smart 
phones, learning using AR has become possible.  
Smartphones and tablets are ideal c hoices for realizing augmented reality experiences 
through fast processors, graphics hardware, and various integrated sensors.  
 Mobile AR applications can be used in various education sectors and education related 
AR applications are now more common on mo bile devices Using AR can increase the 
motivation of students to study and improve academic performance. Research on the 
effects of using mobile AR in education is insufficient, and there are many ways to 
explore the potential of AR to enhance students’ le arning motivation and improve 
academic performance.  
Most technologies used for AR and VR are based on a specific single device. Microsoft 
HoloLens It is a device that inserts virtual objects and information into the user's field 
of vision, providing an au gmented reality experience. Oculus Rift is a virtual reality 
viewer that covers what users see the entire field of view and only interact with the 
virtual objects displayed in the viewer.       
Other devices include simple smartphone casings, where the sma rtphone transmits 
images to the user through a stereo lens system. These devices provide an immersive 
experience in an immersive environment that can easily make users feel as if they are 
living in a virtual world or expanding and separating in the real wo rld. On the other 
hand, they also have some shortcomings in terms of ergonomics, such as: B. Due to 
incorrect focus distance, the user's field of view is limited and eye adjustment problems 
occur. The fact that users feel completely disconnected from the r eal world can also 
bring some dangers, especially when used for a long period of time.   
 
2.1.6 . MOBILE AUGMENTED REALITY       
   
Augmented Reality on Mobile is a new Augmented Reality technology that can be used 
on mobile devices such as smartphones, iPad s, iPods, gaming consoles, and military 
Head -Up Displays (HUD). It extends and improves the mobile device's user experience    
   
  
Figure 2.  Reality -virtuality continuum Taken from Yuan thesis   
The following characteristics define mobile augmented reality:   
1) It combines real and virtual imagery;   
2) It is interactive in real time;   
3) It registers the virtual imagery with the real world; and4) it is accessible via 
mobile devices (Goh, Sunar , and Ismail 2019; Keating et al. 2011).   
   
The improvement of AR innovation started during the 1960s. In 1994, Milgram and 
Kishino proposed "reality -virtuality continuum" which separated the innovation 
between the nonstop scale among the real world and virtuality. Since then, AR has been 
perceived as a free field of study. Contrasted with blended reality (MR) and computer 
generated reality (VR), the expanded reality gives more practical encounters with the 
blend of the virtual and genuine climate.    
  
Nonetheless, the improvement of AR was as yet restricted and stayed at the period of 
preliminary applications until the mid -2000s. With the presentation of superior cell 

phones, camera, designs preparing abilities, and inertial sensors, AR is getting more 
consideration and won (Ko, Chang, and Ji 2013).   
There are three main technologies on which the AR system is built:    
1. Tracking. The system must know the user's view to retrieve and display   related 
virtual content. In particular, it must know the positio n and orientation of the display 
system in a physical coordinate system with a known mapping to a virtual system. The 
setting of orientation and position parameters is called tracking.   
2. Register. Tracking is only a means to gain registration of the ultima te alignment 
of real and virtual information displayed to the user. Recording must be performed to 
an accuracy of pixels at an interactive frame rate to maintain the illusion of real and 
virtual coexistence in the same domain.    
3. Display. An AR system must  be able to create a combination of the real and the 
virtual. Therefore, the screen must be allowing the user to see the real world covered 
by 3D graphics. It must also be tracked to  at an interactive frame rate.  
 
2.2. RELATED STUDIES      
   
 2.2.1.   FOREIGN STUDIES      
 Self-Coordinated Learning  
Several foundations have recently embraced it as an important factor of their long-term 
preparation and achievement. Despite consistent growth patterns in online attendance 
and the benefits of onlin e learning, dropout rates for online classes continue to be higher 
than the conventional (on -campus) courses.      
     
The self -coordinated learning (SDL) hypothesis of Knowles have been emphatically 
connected with online scholastic execution and recognized as indicators of online 
learning and life achievement.      
     
Impacts identifying with knowledge and skills may be  separated into three categories: 
engagement factors, which make students more receptive to learning; psychological 
elements, which make learning content more open and aid comprehension; and 
execution factors, which produce improved results and create skil l. Impacts of creating 
development as self -governing students centralized: the growth of trust, especially for 
student who have had little achievement in the past; inspiration to learn; and self -
sufficiency, taking greater responsibility for their own lear ning and finding out how to 
learn.     
      
The advantages of web -based learning incorporate adaptability, openness, and greater 
access to learning assets, specifically for communities who may never have the 
opportunity to acquire an education. Online enr ollment growth patterns are  predictable  
and the advantages of web -based instruction, online course wear down rates remain 
higher than traditional face -to face instruction. (Bawa, 2016;  Choi and Park, 2018; Doe 
et al., 2017; Kauffman, 2015; Pec k, Stefania k, and Shah, 2018). India is utilizing 
amazing ICT instruments like open source, satellites innovation, neighborhood 
language interfaces, human -PC interface, advanced libraries, and an arrangement to 
come to the remotest of towns. College Awards Commission  (UGC) - INFONET gives 
electronic access to insightful writing accessible over the web in every aspect of 
figuring out how to the college area in India. UGC also leads IT/ICT direction programs 
for college and school. For improving the ICT abilities of ins tructors, associations like 
the Public Board of Instructive Exploration and Preparing (NCERT) and Public Board 
for Educator Schooling (NCTE) have been dispatching conspires occasionally. .       
      
Advantages of Educational Technology development: Consi stent access to learning 
assets: With portable learning, you can take in and focus anywhere - from the classroom 
to your office, or from your computer to your pocket. A true modular learning platform 
enables customers to take a course on any computer.     
Adaptable, compact  accommodation         
The most important advantage of m -Learning is the ability to change learning 
schedules. Students are not restricted to a given actual climate, a certain transportation 
channel, or a predetermined number of periods fo r undergoing preparation and training. 
Understudies will update their insight base with a no time to waste premise by using 
the most current breakthrough to prep for meetings or introductions.         
Opportunity, force, and choice: m -Learning students can  choose where, when, and how 
they will think. The new variety of possibilities involves internet, interactive self -
guided, downloaded online learning, and computer -based learning. Learning offers new 
levels of opportunity, and also the ability to take cont rol over learning designs. Students 
will access authoritative capacities, download classes, and survey their learning 
experience through a learning the executives framework with only a PDA, mobile 
gadget, PDA, or then again crossover tool.  M-Learning offe rs a proficient path for 
students to get to key data and boost their time.      
Shared Learning  
Shared Learning: Both the capacities of cell phones and their wide setting of utilization 
add to their penchant to cultivate cooperation. Cell phones can undoub tedly speak with 
different gadgets of the equivalent or comparative sort, empowering students to share 
information, records and messages. They can likewise be associated with a common 
information organization, further improving opportunities for correspond ence. These 
gadgets are too commonly utilized in a social environment, thus connections and 
coordinated effort will in general happen through the gadgets as well as at and around 
them too. Investigation into community learning with cell phones is incredibl y educated 
by past research on PC Up held   .   
 
 
2.2.2. LOCAL STUDIES    
 
At the University of the Philippines – Open College (UPOU, depicted in segment 1.4), 
asset based  course improvement has been supported since 2003. It into the fundamental 
course improvement model in 2007 when the college moved to Moodle , an open source 
VLE which takes into account the production of courses including computerized assets 
and online exe rcises straightforwardly on the Moodle framework. New courses are 
being created under an asset based course improvement agreement, and personnel 
appointed to educate (called personnel in control  or FICs) effectively created courses 
are urged to enhance the  print modules (or supplant them inside and out, whenever 
justified) with open instructive assets (OER). FICs are likewise urged to coordinate on 
the web conversation gatherings, and they are allowed to utilize open source Web 
devices, for example, media s haring locales and Electronic conferencing applications, 
to upgrade course conveyance. The effect of setting on instructing approaches is 
particularly evident where educating and learning are non -adjoining. Among others, the 
present circumstance makes stud ent investigation "before any educating and learning 
happens" (Naidu, 2007, p. 248) fundamental.       
 
As per Naidu, while in study hall based educating "[a] extraordinary arrangement about 
student attributes, their learning styles, and ways to deal with study is regularly 
assumed" (p. 248), in DE it is basic that student ascribes, abilities, and requirements be 
taken into account in media determination, plan for association, and evaluation and 
criticism.(Naidu, 2007; Shearer, 2007). Nonetheless, calculati ng in student attributes is 
moreover especially testing in DE where there is an extraordinary variety of students 
and learning settings (Benson and Samarawickrema, 2009; Naidu, 2007; White, 2005).       
     
DE PROGRAM ( Small single -mode distance education )     
 
Three student related variables are particularly significant in DE program and course 
configuration: access, student self -governance, and association (Shearer, 2007). The 
worry for access is key to DE, a method of schooling that looks for definitely  to make 
learning openings available to "all people, paying little mind to their age, sex, area, 
what's more, individual situation" (White, 2005, p. 166).      Utilization of Web 
innovations both empowers and obliges this mission by expanding the scope of DE 
projects while additionally restricting their range just to those students with admittance 
to the Web. The expanding accessibility of PCs and the Web even in non -industrial 
nations might be narrowing this specific computerized partition. Nonetheless, it  is 
imperative to likewise consider the impact on student access of the calculated 
necessities of specific e learning plans, like data transfer capacity for getting to a VLE, 
participating in coordinated exercises, and getting to and utilizing specific sub stance 
configurations, for example, video documents Clara and Fitri, 2007).      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3. Methodology  
     
The researcher will use Agile Methodology for software development in developing the 
Augmented Reality Mobile Application is the agile software development where refers 
to a set of iterative software development approaches in which requirements and 
solutions change via cooperation amongst self  - organizing cross -functional team 
development. Furthermore, the researchers recommended t hree stages: Pre -Production 
Phase or Planning.     
  
In here, the researcher will be planning and identifying the components needed for the 
development of the augmented reality application:     
     
1. Production Phase or Development     
In here, the researcher are going to be planning and identifying the components needed 
for the event of the mobile application.     
 Identifying what the researcher are going to be developing     
 Checklist of goals to be done or needed within the developmen t   
2. Production Phase or Development     
In here, development or the execution of the pre -production phase will commence.     
 Do the task supported the checklis t from the pre -production phase      
 Implementation are going to be done by using the Unity Engine .     
 Testing of the augmented reality mobile application during this phase so that to 
be able to know if there will be an improvement or need to be fixed.     
 The respondents of the application will be taking a survey during this phase.     
 In the algorit hmic side, image tracking will be used for the augmented 
application.   
 
3. Post-Production Phase or Closure      
In here, development and testing are done and is predicted to be deployed to the 
respondents. The  researchers' proposed agile methodology's three p hases will be 
applied in this research of developing the augmented application.     
     
3.1 Research Design      
   The research design that will be utilized in this research is qualitative research  
design that the researchers will going to use. Research method that will be applied in 
making of this study to find out if the use and effectiveness of AR (Augmented 
Reality) is useful and helpful for elementary teachers and students through 
questionnaire s and surveys.      
3.2. System  Application  Design  
 System Application  design for Mobile  Marker Based Augmented Reality 
Applications.  
Mobile Marker -Based AR System: Despite the fact that mobile AR is still in its early 
stages of development, there has bee n a lot of worry and discussion about marker -
based AR because it is one of the most trustworthy types of AR systems.   
Video stream from the    
 
   Augmented scene  
  
 
 
Figure 3. Mobile Marker - Based Augmented Reality Application  Design   
Excellent marker is easily and consistently identifiable under all conditions. Variations 
in luminance (brightness) are easier to perceive than differences in color. Machine 
vision techniques are used to determine chrominance (color). This is owing to the 
cameras' poor aut omated white balance: colors register wrongly, and an object's color 
in the image may shift depending on what else is in the frame, for example. 
Furthermore, the lighting alters the apparent colors of the objects, making color 
recognition difficult. Natura lly, the greater the contrast in the higher the luminance, the 
easier it is to notice objects. Black and white markers are ideal in this regard.  
 
Using the identified marker, the system should also be able to determine the camera's 
pose. Four known locatio ns are enough to calculate a camera's posture uniquely, and 
the simplest shape to get them is a square. Furthermore, Corner point placements are 
generally resilient since they can be calculated as intersections of edge lines.  

3.3 Marker Based Procedure  
The first purpose of a marker detection procedure is to identify probable marker 
outlines. Markers, and then to deduce the locations of the corners of the markers in the 
image Furthermore, the detecting system must determine that it is a marker and decode 
its meaning i dentity. Finally, the system computes the pose bas ed on the data from the 
sensors  found the marker's location.  
The following are the steps in the basic marker detection procedure:  
1. Obtaining Images the capture of an intensity image  
2. Preproc essing image processing on a low level distortion line detecting/fitting 
detection of the marker's corners  
3. Detection of possible markers and elimination of evident non -markers are quickly 
rejected if they are obvious. For possible markers, a rapid acce ptance test is used.  
4. Marker identification and decoding matching templates (template markers) 
encoding (data markers).  
5. The marker pose is calculated. Pose estimation of markers for a correct pose, 
iterative pose calculation is used.  
3.4 Vuforia  
Vuforia is an appropriate tool for AR development; it supports iOS, Android, and 
Windows  UWP and Android. When combined with Unity, it represents one of the best 
cross -platform solutions. The Vuforia, according to their official website, A multitude 
of sorts  of recognition are possible with the platform. Developers can use Vuforia to 
bring synthetic things to life by using recognition and animation  tracking of a larger 
number of items Vuforia Target Manager also works  a picture enhancement that, in 
turn, lead s to the optimization of the  performance  of the application It also detects and 
tracks photos that have been predefined by the user  that allow interaction within the AR 
world  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.5. User Case diagram   
 
 
Place the  
Camera  
On the image  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 USER  
 
 
Augmented  
scene 
Choose the  
Bone 
Structure to 
view  
 Marker 
 
 
 

 
  
   Figure 4.User  case diagram  
When you first click the first button, then click ag ain to disappear, then the next button, 
then exit, then the x button, the n the  audio will re turn and the speaker will play when you 
click it for  second  time.  
 
3.6. Research Materials  
3.6.1 Software     
In this section, the software/s below will be used for the implementation of the 
augmented reality application:     
     
• Unity Game Engine  – is a gaming engine used for the developing the mobile 
Augmented Reality.     
• VS Code  – is an editor used for the mobile application Augmented  
Reality script.      
• Blender - is a 3D creative suite free and open source that covers almost all 
aspects of 3D design.          
  
3.6.2 Hardware     
     
In this section, the hardware below will be  used for the implementation of the 
augmented reality application:      
 Laptop     
• Processor: intel core i3 4.0ghz     
• Operating System: Windows 10 Pro     
• Ram: 4gb ram,     
 Android      
• API level:  26  
• Operating system: Android 8. 0  Ram: 2gb       
    
 3.7. Research locale      
      
The research study will be conducted only in selected elementary school here at 
Zamboanga City, specifically at Baliwasan District. Baliwasan District has six (6) 
elementary schools.    The Central school is adjacent to the City Schools Division office. 
The nearest school from   City Hall is three (3) kilometers while the farthest is twelve 
(12) kilometers, this are, the Baliwasn Central School and Southern Support Command 
School respectively.         
     
3.8 Population and S ampling      
      
The participants of this research are the elementary students and teachers who will be 
using the Augmented Reality (AR) Mobile Application develop by the researchers. The 
sampling method that will be used is Purposive sampling because it will be difficult to 
use other sampling techniques because of the existing Pandemic and Quarantine status 
of the City which varies every now and then.  Students who have stable internet 
connection will be the target respondents of this study. It is because elementary student s 
are strictly not allowed to go out of their respective houses thus purposive sampling is 
the proper sampling method to be used in this study. This is to ensure that respondents 
will answer the questionnaire and will use the Augmented Reality Application.        
      
Teachers teaching Grade 5 and Grade 6 will be able to help evaluate and distribute the 
AR develop by the researchers because they are the one who knows who among their 
students have stable internet connection.       
 
 
3. 9 RESEARCH INSTRUMENT       
      
The research instrument has two parts. Part 1 is about the basic information of the 
respondents. P art 2 which comprises of sixteen (17 ) questions, the first eight (8) 
questions is answerable by yes or no, while the next five ( 5) questions would  answer 
the effectiveness of the AR. This will also answer if the participants finds it useful and 
effective in their learning.      
      
The survey will be conducted through online using google form where the elementary 
teachers and students will be give n the link.      
      
The survey questionnaire will be uploaded to the internet using google forms to acquire 
details from the respondents; the elementary teachers and elementary students.      
      
3.10. VALIDITY OF INSTRUMENT      
      
To ensure the validity of the instruments that will be used in this research, the 
researchers will seek the help of our professors from ICT Department before it will be 
distributed to the respondents. They will be consulted for the appropriateness of 
quest ionnaire. Their comments will be integrated to the questionnaire.      
     
 
3.11. DATA GATHERING PROCEDURE         
 
The researchers will request class advisers of Grade 5 and Grade 6 of the Baliwasan 
District to identify their students who have the stable internet connections. Once 
identified that this students have stable internet connections, the parents will be 
informed that their child is one of the respondent of the study. If the parents will 
agree, then the AR apps will be forwarded to them for the us e of their child. If the 
parents will disagree, then their child will not be included in the study.       
  
When the AR Apps will be uploaded to the student t and he/she starts to use it, the 
survey questionnaire will be uploaded to web and they will be gi ven the link of the 
survey questionnaire for then to answer, this is to ensure that all identified 
respondents will answer the questionnaires.       
  
3.12. Statistical tool      
      
The researchers will use an appropriate statistical tool for this study , namely chi-
square  for the questions with answers of  yes or no. For questions 6 – 17, which has 
the Likert scale the mean will be used. It will also use t -test about means from within 
school. ANOVA will be used to determine the significant effect from amo ng six (6) 
different elementary schools of Baliwasan District.      
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter  4 Results and Discussions  
 
This chapter discusses the result of the study.  
4.1 Samples and Population  
The questionnaire was uploaded using google form. There were sixty -three (63) 
respondents who answered the questionnaire that has seventeen  (17) questions. Of the 
sixty -three (63) respondents, 23.8% or fifteen (15) were teachers and 76.2% or forty -
eight (4 8) were students.  The table below shows the distribution of the respondents. Of 
the sixty -three (63) respondents, only sixty (60) give their schools as follows seventeen 
(17) from BCS, eleven (11) from San Jose Gusu, sixteen (16) from EBCS, six (6) from 
GSMS, thirteen (13) from SSC, and three (3) from JSES. It was observed that all 
respondents were from Baliwasan District, Zamboanga City Schools Division.  61.9% 
or 69 of the respondents were males and 38.1% or 24 respondents were females.  
The age of the s tudents ranges from ten (10) years old to twelve (12) year old while the 
age of the teachers ranges from twenty -eight (28) years old to thirty -nine (39) years old.  
37.1% or 23 respondents ages 10 years old, 22.6% or 14 have the age of eleven (11) 
years ol d, and 16.1% or ten (10) of the respondents have the age of twelve (12) years 
old. On Teacher -respondents, three (3) or 4.8% have the age of twenty -eight (28), four 
(4) or 6.5% percent have the age of twenty -nine (29), while ages thirty (30), thirty -five 
(35), thirty -seven (37) and thirty -nine (39) have one (1) respondent each and two (2) 
respondents each for ages thirty -two (32) and thirty -three (33)  
Table 4.1 Distribution of Respondents according to category  
 
 
 
 
4.2 On -line Learning  
 All respondents have gadgets such as android cellphone and computers at their 
home, and they know how to use the gadgets.  95.2% or sixty (60) of them have internet 
access at home while the remaining 4.8% or three of them do not have internet at their 
home . All teacher -respondent have internet access at their home.  
 When ask if they enjoy on -line learning 90.5% or fifty -seven (57) of the 
respondent do not enjoy on -line learning while only 9.5% or only six (6) of them enjoy 
the on -line learning.  Students’ data showed when categorized in terms of sex, the Chi -
squared ( 𝜒2) test gives the computed value at 0.091 which is less than 3.48 with alpha 
(α) at 0.05 level of confidence. This implies that there is no significant difference on 
the answers between male and female students. This show that students do not enjoy 
on-line learning.  
 The table below shows the result of the survey for question number 4 when 
categorized as student in terms of sex.  

Table 4.2 Responses of students  
 Male  Female  
Yes  2 1 
No  26 19 
  
When data was subjected to chi -squared ( 𝜒2) test the result showed no significant 
difference. However, the result for teachers is significant with computed chi -squared 
(𝜒2) of 6.233.  This show that teachers enjoy teaching on -line.  But, when da ta was 
grouped together, the result is no significant . Their responses when asked if they play 
video games, 90.5% say yes and 9.5% answered no.   
Table 4.3. Responses of Teachers  
 Male  Female  
Yes  3 4 
No  8 0 
 
  
 
 28.6% of respondents rate online learning very ineffective, 25.4% less ineffective, and 
41.3% less effective, and only 4.8% or only three (3) of the respondents say online 
learning as effective.  
Table 4.4 Pie chart on rating online learning  
 
 
 
 
 
50.8 pe rcent of the respondents says that video game in learning or teaching is effective, 
17.5 percent says that it is less effective, 12.7 percent of respondents say it is very 
effective, while both 9.5 percent of respondents says it is less ineffective and ver y 
ineffective  
 
Table.4.4  Pie Chart on how useful the video games in learning or teaching  
 

 
 
 
 
 
55.6 percent of the respondents says th ey believe  that if they will be given a related 
application in learning or teaching is effective, 20.6 percent says that  it is very effective, 
14.3 percent of respondents say it is less effective, while 6.3 percent of respondents 
says it is less ineffective while 3.2 percent says it is  very ineffective.  
 
Table.4.5  Pie Chart that believes on the given related app  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39.7 percent of the respondents says th ey are focused on their learning or teaching  it is 
less effective  31.7 percent  says that it is  very in effective, 1 4.3 percent of respondents 
say it is effective, while 11.1 percent of respondents says it is less ineffect ive while 3.2 
percent says it is  very effective.   
 
Table.4.6  Pie Chart on how the respondents are focus on this pandemic on their 
learning/teaching.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39.7 percent of the respondents says th ey are focused on their learning or teaching i t is 
less effective  31.7 percent  says that it is  very in effective, 22.2 percent of respondents 
say it is  less in effective, while 11.1 percent of respondents says it is effective while 4.8 
percent says it is  very effective.  
 
Table.4.7  Pie Chart on how the respondents are doing well on this pandemic on their 
learning/teaching.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 percent of the respondents says that ANILAB is effective , 22.2 percent  says that it 
is very effective, 12.7 percent of respondents say it is  less i neffective, while 7.9 percent 
of respondents says it is very effective while 3.2 percent says it is  very ineffective in 
terms of entertainment . 
 
 
 
Table.4.8  Pie Chart on rating the ANILAB in terms of entertainment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
54 percent of the respondents s ays that ANILAB useful as additional material in their 
study/ teaching is  effective , 22.2 percent  says that it is  less effective , both 9.5 percent of 
respondents says it is very effective and less effective while 4.8 percent says it is  very 
ineffective  
 
 
Table.4.9  Pie Chart on how useful the ANILAB as an additional material in 
teaching/study is  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58.7 percent of the respondents says that ANILAB enhance their knowledge in science 
is effective , 22.2 percent  says that it is  less effective , both 9.5 percent of respondents 
says it is very effective and less effective while 4.8 percent says it is  very ineffective  
 
Table.4.10  Pie Chart on how ANILAB enhance their knowledge in science.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60.3 percent of the respondents says that ANILAB that is usef ul as an additional 
material in their study/ teaching in science is effective , 20.6 percent  says that it is  less 

effective , while 11.1 percent says it is very effective while 4.8 says it is very ineffective 
and 3.2 percent says it is less ineffective  
 
Tabl e 4.11 . Pie Chart on how ANILAB useful as an additional material in their study/ 
teaching in science  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55.6 percent of the respondents rated  the ANILAB in terms of educational content is 
effective , 19 percent  says that it is  less effective , while 14.3 percent says it is very 
effective while 6.3 says it is less ineffective and 4.8 percent says it is very ineffective.  
 
 
 
 
Table 4.12.  Pie Chart rating on how ANILAB in terms of educational content.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52.4 percent of the respondents rated  the ANILAB in terms of systems functionality is 
effective , 27 percent  says that it is  less effective , while 9.5 percent says it is very 
effective while 6.3 says it is less ineffective and 4.8 percent says it is very ineffective.  
 
Table 4.13. Pie Chart rati ng on how ANILAB in terms of systems functionality.  
 

 
 
Chapter 5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion and Recommendation  
5.1. Conclusion  
• The Anilab AR (Augmented Reality) Mobile Marker based Application help both 
teachers and students, thus students were be  able to understand their science lesson 
particularly on human skeletal system with less supervisions of teachers.  
•  For the teachers, the Anilab help them in teaching their students on the human 
skeletal system with less contact or face to face teaching.  
 
 
5.2 RECOMMENDATION  
• The researchers recommended that future researchers will add more topics 
about science. Specifically, the entire elementary science to be covered by the 
Anilab.  
• It is also recommended that the future researchers, to enhance the featur es of 
the Anilab Application.  
 
 
REFERENCES:  
      
M. Alkhattabi (2017).  Augmented Reality as E -learning Tool in Primary      
Schools’ Education: Barriers to Teachers’ Adoption 
https://onlinejournals.org/index.php/ijet/article/view/6158       
     
Tasneem Khan, Kevin Johnston, Jacques Ophoff, "The Impact of an Augmented      
Reality Application on Learning Motivation of  
Students", Advances in Human - Computer  
Interaction, vol. 2019, Article.   ID 7208494, 14 pages, 2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/201 9/7208494  Quintero    
  
J, Baldiris S, Rubira R, Cerón J and Velez G (2019) Augmented Reality in   
Educational Inclusion. A Systematic Review on the Last Decade.  Front. 
Psychol. 10:1835. doi:  
10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01835.      
  
Selwa Elfirdoussi, Mohamed Lachgar, Hind Kabaili, Abdelali Rochdi, Driss     
Goujdami, Larbi El Firdoussi, "Assessing Distance  
Learning in Higher   Education during the COVID19 Pandemic", Education 
Research International, vol. 2020, Article ID 8890633, 13 pages, 2020.   
https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/889063.     
     
Michał Bączek Institute of Medical Sciences, Jan Kochanowski University in  
Kielce, Kielce, Poland  The Online Journal of  
Distance Education and e -Learning, October 2020    Volume 8, Issue 4      
  
    
Kingery, Linda S., "Understanding E -Learning as Professional Development 
for  Rural Child Welfare Professionals" (2018). Walden Dissertations and 
Doctoral Studies. 4928. https://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/dissertations/49 28      
Nwankwo, Alex Azike, "Students' Learning Experiences and Perceptions of   
Online Course Content and Interactions" (2015). Walden Dissertations and 
Doctoral Studies. 188. https://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/dissertations/188      
International Journal of Academic Multidisciplinary  
Research (IJAMR) ISSN:  2643 -9670 Vol. 4, Issue 8,  
August – 2020, Pages: 100 -107       
     
Commissiong, Marcia Anne, "Student Engagement, Self -Regulation,   
Satisfaction, and Success in Online Learning Environments" (2020).  Walden 
Dissertations and Doctoral Studies.  
8522.https://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/dissertations/  
8522          
Little, Sharon C., "Strategies for Improving Student Performance in an  
Online      
Introductory Computer Course" (2019). Walden Dissertations and Doctoral      
Studies. 7313. https://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/dissertations/7313      
     
Gilbert, Brittany, "Online Learning Revealing the Benefits and Challenges" 
(2015). Education Masters. Paper 303.      
      
Caballero, J. M.. (2000). The Effect of E -Learning on the Skills and Attitudes of 
Students. TIP Research Journal Manila, 5(1). Retrieved from 
http://ejournals.ph/form/cite.php?id=9080      
      
Firdosh H. Z June 2015. ““Impact of E - learning on student learning and 
employability – A study in  
India.”  
http://www.dypatil.edu/schools/management/wpconte nt/uploads/2015/05/Zulai 
ka-Homavazir -2016.pdf      
     
Arinto  P.B January 2013, Teaching at a Distance in a Digital Age: 
Perspectives from the Philippines       
      
https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/eprint/10020020/1/ARI NTO,%20P.B..pdf  Shafiei    
Sarvestani M, Mohammadi M, Afshin J, Raeisy L. Students’  Experiences  of      
E-Learning Challenges; a Phenomenological Study. Interdiscip J Virtual Learn 
Med Sci. 2019;10(3):1 -10. doi: 10.30476/IJVLMS.2019.45841.      
Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration,  
Volume V, NumberIII, Fall   2002      
         
State University of West Georgia, Distance Education Center      
Gilbert, Brittany, "Online Learning Revealing the  
Benefits and Challenges"    (2015). Education  
Masters. Paper 303      
   
Hawkins, Alissa B., "How are Elementary Teachers  
Utilizing Technology to Enhance Their Instruction of  
Literacy in the Classroom?" (2010). Education Masters. Paper 33.     
Hsu, YS, Lin, YH. & Yang, B. Impact of augmented reality lessons on students’      
STEM interest. RPTEL 12, 2 (2017). https://doi.org /10.1186/s41039 -0160039z    
Yuan Thesis (2019) Design Guidelines for Mobile Augmented Reality 
Reconstruction   
Kasetty sudarshan, Sneha. (2017). AUGMENTED REALITY IN MOBILE 
DEVICES.    
 Cooper Daniel (2011) User and design perspectives of mobile augmented 
reality   
 Our Over -Reliance on Technology. McPherson, Susan. 2, s.l. : Associated 
Content, 2009, Vol. 1.  
Kharif, Olga. Social Networking Goes Mobile.  
Business Week. [Online] 31 May 2006. [Cited:  
5 December 2009.]  
Enhancing User Interaction With First Person  
User Interface. Smashing Magazine. [Online] 7 Dec 2009. [Cited: 5 December 
2009.] http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2009/09/21/ enhancing -user-
interaction -with-first-personuser -interface/.  
Measuring Commercial PL/I Programs Using  
Halstead's Criteri a. Elshoff, J.L. 5, s.l. : ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 1976, Vol. 
11.  
[5] Villmann, Alex. How to Setup a Dedicated  
Web Server for Free. net tuts+. [Online] 4 December 2008. [Cited: 6 
December 2009.] http://net.tutsplus.com/articles/news/how -tosetup -a-
dedicated -web-server -for-free/. Windows Azure. Windows Azure Platform. 
[Online] 2009. [Cited: 6 December 2009.] 
http://www.microsoft .com/windowsazure/windo wsazure   
 
Siltanen, Sanni. (2012). Theory and applications of marker based augmented 
reality.  
 https://webthesis.biblio.polito.it/6596/1/tesi.pdf  
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES  
  
Hello Respondent,      
     
The researchers of this survey are students from Western Mindanao 
State University in Institute of Computer Studies taking BS Computer 
Science and is currently working on a thesis entitled “Anilab: an 
Augmented Reality mobile app used to assist teacher in educating 
elementary students”      
     
     
The study aims to propose a mobile gaming application that will be helpful   
for elementary students and teachers. This proposal also aims to determine 
if the playing mobile game application is effective in teac hing and learning 
lessons.     
      
Rest assured that your answers in this survey will be treated with the 
utmost confidentiality and will only be used for analysis and 
interpretation for academic purposes.     
     
Your participation will be highly appre ciated for it will contribute to 
the realization of this proposal. Thank you very much for your time and 
support. Please click on the "Next" button to proceed to the 
questionnaires.     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Survey Questionnaire   
 Part 1. Basic Information     
Name (Optional )__________________________________    
Name of School: ___________________________Age:   
_______ yrs old    Please check:      Student  [   ]            Teacher: 
[   ]    Gender:  Male     [    ]      Female [   ]         
INSTRUCTION: Please read carefully and choose the most appropriate answer 
to the question.      
     
1. Do you have gadgets at home such as android cellphone, 
computer and tablets,  
   a. YES   b.NO    
  
2. Do you know how to use this gadgets?     
a. YES     
b. NO     
     
3. Do you have internet access at home?     
a. YES     
b. NO    
  
4. Do you enjoy online learning (for students)/teaching (for teachers)?  a.  
Yes   b.  No     
5. Do you play video games?      
a. YES     
b. NO     
   
6. How would you rate online learning/teaching?     
a. Very Ineffective     
b. Less Ineffective     
c. Effective     
d. Less  Effective     
e. Very Effective  
  
7. Do you agree that video games is useful in your learning/teaching?       
a. Very Ineffective     
b. Less Ineffective     
c. Effective     
d. Less  Effective     
e. Very Effective     
     
8. If you are given an apps that is related to teaching/learning do you believe it 
will be  
a.  Very Ineffective     
b. Less Ineffective     
c. Effective     
d. Less  Effective     
e. Very Effective     
     
9. How focused are you on your learn ing/teaching during this 
pandemic?     
     
a. Very Ineffective     
b. Less Ineffective     
c. Effective     
d. Less  Effective     
e. Very Effective     
     
10. How sure you are that you do well in your learning/teaching during this 
pandemic?     
     
a. Very Ineffective     
b. Less Ineffective     
c. Effective     
d. Less  Effective     
e. Very Effective     
 
  11. Rate the video/Anilab in terms of entertainment.      
a. Very Ineffective     
b. Less Ineffective     
c. Effective     
d. Less  Effective     
e. Very Effective     
 
12. Is the video/Anilab useful as an additional material in your study/teaching?      
     
a.     Very Ineffective     
b. Less Ineffective     
c. Effective     
d. Less  Effective     
e. Very Effective     
 
13. Did the video/Anilab enhance your knowledge in science?  
     
a. Very Ineffective     
b. Less Ineffective     
c. Effective     
d. Less  Effective     
e. Very Effective  
 
14. Is the video/Anilab useful as an additional material in your study/teaching in science?      
a. Very Ineffective     
b. Less Ineffective     
c. Effective     
d. Less  Effective     
e. Very Effective  
 
15. Rate the video/Anilab in terms of educational content.  
 
a. Very Ineffective     
b. Less Ineffective     
c. Effective     
d. Less  Effective     
e. Very Effective  
 
 
 
 
 
16. Rate the video/Anilab in terms of systems functionality.  
 
a. Very Ineffective     
b. Less Ineffective     
c. Effective     
d. Less  Effective     
e. Very Effective  
 
17. Rate the video/Anilab in terms of usability/usefulness as an additional learning materials.  
 
a. Very Ineffective     
b. Less Ineffective     
c. Effective     
d. Less  Effective     
e. Very Effective  
  
REFERENCES:  
      
M. Alkhattabi (2017).  Augmented Reality as E -learning Tool in Primary      
Schools’ Education: Barriers to Teachers’ Adoption 
https://onlinejournals.org/index.php/ijet/article/view/6158       
     
Tasneem Khan, Kevin Johnston, Jacques Ophoff, "The Impact of an Augmented      
Reality Application on Learning Motivation of  
Students", Advances in Human - Computer  
Interaction, vol. 2019, Article.   ID 7208494, 14 pages, 2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/201 9/7208494  Quintero    
  
J, Baldiris S, Rubira R, Cerón J and Velez G (2019) Augmented Reality in   
Educational Inclusion. A Systematic Review on the Last Decade.  Front. 
Psychol. 10:1835. doi:  
10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01835.      
  
Selwa Elfirdoussi, Mohamed L achgar, Hind Kabaili, Abdelali Rochdi, Driss     
Goujdami, Larbi El Firdoussi, "Assessing Distance  
Learning in Higher   Education during the COVID19 Pandemic", Education 
Research International, vol. 2020, Article ID 8890633, 13 pages, 2020.   
https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/889063.     
     
Michał Bączek Institute of Medical Sciences, Jan Kochanowski University in  
Kielce, Kielce, Poland  The Online Journal of  
Distance Education and e -Learni ng, October 2020    Volume 8, Issue 4      
  
    
Kingery, Linda S., "Understanding E -Learning as Professional Development 
for  Rural Child Welfare Professionals" (2018). Walden Dissertations and 
Doctoral Studies. 4928. https://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/diss ertations/4928      
Nwankwo, Alex Azike, "Students' Learning Experiences and Perceptions of   
Online Course Content and Interactions" (2015). Walden Dissertations and 
Doctoral Studies. 188. https://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/dissertations/188      
Internatio nal Journal of Academic Multidisciplinary  
Research (IJAMR) ISSN:  2643 -9670 Vol. 4, Issue 8,  
August – 2020, Pages: 100 -107       
     
Commissiong, Marcia Anne, "Student Engagement, Self -Regulation,   
Satisfaction, and Success in Online Learning Environments" (2020). Walden 
Dissertations and Doctoral Studies.  
8522.https://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/dissertations/  
8522          
Little, Sharon C., "Strategies for Improving Student Performance in an  
Online       
Introductory Computer Course" (2019). Walden Dissertations and Doctoral      
Studies. 7313. https://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/dissertations/7313      
     
Gilbert, Brittany, "Online Learning Revealing the Benefits and Challenges" 
(2015). Education Mas ters. Paper 303.      
      
Caballero, J. M.. (2000). The Effect of E -Learning on the Skills and Attitudes of 
Students. TIP Research Journal Manila, 5(1). Retrieved from 
http://ejournals.ph/form/cite.php?id=9080      
      
Firdosh H. Z June 2015. ““Impact of E- learning on student learning and 
employability – A study in  
India.”  
http://www.dypatil.edu/schools/management/wpconte nt/uploads/2015/05/Zulai 
ka-Homavazir -2016.pdf      
     
Arinto P.B January 2013, Teaching at a Distance in a Digital Age: 
Perspec tives from the Philippines       
      
https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/eprint/10020020/1/ARI NTO,%20P.B..pdf  Shafiei    
Sarvestani M, Mohammadi M, Afshin J, Raeisy L. Students’  Experiences of      
E-Learning Challenges; a Phenomenological Study. Interdisc ip J Virtual Learn 
Med Sci. 2019;10(3):1 -10. doi: 10.30476/IJVLMS.2019.45841.      
Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration,  
Volume V, NumberIII, Fall   2002      
         
State University of West Georgia, Distance Education Center      
Gilbert, Brittany, "Online Learning Revealing the  
Benefits and Challenges"    (2015). Education  
Masters. Paper 303      
   
Hawkins, Alissa B., "How are Elementary Teachers  
Utilizing Technology to Enhance Their Instruction of  
Literacy in the Classroom?" (2010). Education Masters. Paper 33.     
Hsu, YS, Lin, YH. & Yang, B. Impact of augmented reality lessons on students’      
STEM interest. RPTEL 12, 2 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1186/s41039 -0160039z    
Yuan Thesis (2019) Design Guidelines for Mobile Augmented Reality 
Reconstruction   
Kasetty sudarshan, Sneha. (2017). AUGMENTED REALITY IN MOBILE 
DEVICES.    
 Cooper Daniel (2011) User and design perspectives of mobile augmented 
reality   
 Our Over -Reliance on Technology. McPherson,  Susan. 2, s.l. : Associated 
Content, 2009, Vol. 1.  
Kharif, Olga. Social Networking Goes Mobile.  
Business Week. [Online] 31 May 2006. [Cited:  
5 December 2009.]  
Enhancing User Interaction With First Person  
User Interface. Smashing Magazine. [Online] 7 Dec 2009. [Cited: 5 December 
2009.] http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2009/09/21/ enhancing -user-
interaction -with-first-personuser -interface/.  
Measuring Commercial PL/I Programs Using  
Halstead's Criteria. Elshoff, J.L. 5, s.l. : ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 1976, Vol. 
11.  
[5] Villmann, Alex. How to Setup a Dedicated  
Web Server for Free. net tuts+. [Online] 4 December 2008. [Cited: 6 
December 2009.] http://net.tutsplus.com/articles/news/how -tosetup -a-
dedicated -web-server -for-free/. Windows Azure. Windows Azure Pla tform. 
[Online] 2009. [Cited: 6 December 2009.] 
http://www.microsoft.com/windowsazure/windo wsazure   
 
Siltanen, Sanni. (2012). Theory and applications of marker based augmented 
reality.  
 https://webthesis.biblio.polito.it/6596/1/tesi.pdf  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 